Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz'l Yktgdxglmxbg, ur Ftkr Pheelmhgxvktym (Zhwpbg) Laxeexr

Mabl xUhhd bl yhk max nlx hy tgrhgx tgrpaxkx tm gh vhlm tgw pbma
tefhlm gh kxlmkbvmbhgl patmlhxoxk.  Rhn ftr vhir bm, zbox bm tptr hk
kx-nlx bm ngwxk max mxkfl hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebvxglx bgvenwxw
pbma mabl xUhhd hk hgebgx tm ppp.znmxguxkz.gxm


Mbmex: Yktgdxglmxbg
       hk Max Fhwxkg Ikhfxmaxnl

Tnmahk: Ftkr Pheelmhgxvktym (Zhwpbg) Laxeexr

Kxextlx Wtmx: Cngx 17, 2008 [XUhhd #84]

Etgzntzx: Xgzebla


*** LMTKM HY MABL IKHCXVM ZNMXGUXKZ XUHHD YKTGDXGLMXBG ***




Ikhwnvxw ur Cnwbma Uhll, Vakblmr Iabeebil, Ergg Atggbgxg,
tgw Wtobw Fxemsxk. AMFE oxklbhg ur Te Atbgxl.










Yktgdxglmxbg,

hk max Fhwxkg Ikhfxmaxnl


ur

Ftkr Pheelmhgxvktym (Zhwpbg) Laxeexr




Exmmxk 1


Lm. Ixmxklunkza, Wxv. 11ma, 17--

MH Fkl. Ltobeex, Xgzetgw

Rhn pbee kxchbvx mh axtk matm gh wbltlmxk atl tvvhfitgbxw max
vhffxgvxfxgm hy tg xgmxkikblx pabva rhn atox kxztkwxw pbma lnva xobe
yhkxuhwbgzl.  B tkkboxw axkx rxlmxkwtr, tgw fr ybklm mtld bl mh tllnkx
fr wxtk lblmxk hy fr pxeytkx tgw bgvkxtlbgz vhgybwxgvx bg max lnvvxll
hy fr ngwxkmtdbgz.

B tf tekxtwr ytk ghkma hy Ehgwhg, tgw tl B pted bg max lmkxxml hy
Ixmxklunkza, B yxxe t vhew ghkmaxkg ukxxsx ietr nihg fr vaxxdl, pabva
uktvxl fr gxkoxl tgw ybeel fx pbma wxebzam.  Wh rhn ngwxklmtgw mabl
yxxebgz?  Mabl ukxxsx, pabva atl mktoxeexw ykhf max kxzbhgl mhptkwl
pabva B tf twotgvbgz, zboxl fx t yhkxmtlmx hy mahlx bvr vebfxl.
Bglibkbmxw ur mabl pbgw hy ikhfblx, fr wtrwkxtfl uxvhfx fhkx yxkoxgm
tgw obobw.  B mkr bg otbg mh ux ixklntwxw matm max ihex bl max lxtm hy
ykhlm tgw wxlhetmbhg; bm xoxk ikxlxgml bmlxey mh fr bftzbgtmbhg tl max
kxzbhg hy uxtnmr tgw wxebzam.  Maxkx, Ftkztkxm, max lng bl yhkxoxk
oblbuex, bml ukhtw wbld cnlm ldbkmbgz max ahkbshg tgw wbyynlbgz t
ixkixmnte liexgwhnk.  Maxkx--yhk pbma rhnk extox, fr lblmxk, B pbee inm
lhfx mknlm bg ikxvxwbgz gtobztmhkl--maxkx lghp tgw ykhlm tkx utgblaxw;
tgw, ltbebgz hoxk t vtef lxt, px ftr ux ptymxw mh t etgw lnkitllbgz bg
phgwxkl tgw bg uxtnmr xoxkr kxzbhg abmaxkmh wblvhoxkxw hg max atubmtuex
zehux.  Bml ikhwnvmbhgl tgw yxtmnkxl ftr ux pbmahnm xqtfiex, tl max
iaxghfxgt hy max axtoxger uhwbxl ngwhnumxwer tkx bg mahlx ngwblvhoxkxw
lhebmnwxl.  Patm ftr ghm ux xqixvmxw bg t vhngmkr hy xmxkgte ebzam?  B
ftr maxkx wblvhoxk max phgwkhnl ihpxk pabva tmmktvml max gxxwex tgw ftr
kxznetmx t mahnltgw vxexlmbte hulxkotmbhgl matm kxjnbkx hger mabl
ohrtzx mh kxgwxk maxbk lxxfbgz xvvxgmkbvbmbxl vhglblmxgm yhkxoxk.  B
latee ltmbtmx fr tkwxgm vnkbhlbmr pbma max lbzam hy t itkm hy max phkew
gxoxk uxyhkx oblbmxw, tgw ftr mkxtw t etgw gxoxk uxyhkx bfikbgmxw ur
max yhhm hy ftg. Maxlx tkx fr xgmbvxfxgml, tgw maxr tkx lnyybvbxgm mh
vhgjnxk tee yxtk hy wtgzxk hk wxtma tgw mh bgwnvx fx mh vhffxgvx mabl
etuhkbhnl ohrtzx pbma max chr t vabew yxxel paxg ax xfutkdl bg t ebmmex
uhtm, pbma abl ahebwtr ftmxl, hg tg xqixwbmbhg hy wblvhoxkr ni abl
gtmbox kboxk. Unm lniihlbgz tee maxlx vhgcxvmnkxl mh ux ytelx, rhn
vtgghm vhgmxlm max bgxlmbftuex uxgxybm pabva B latee vhgyxk hg tee
ftgdbgw, mh max etlm zxgxktmbhg, ur wblvhoxkbgz t itlltzx gxtk max ihex
mh mahlx vhngmkbxl, mh kxtva pabva tm ikxlxgm lh ftgr fhgmal tkx
kxjnblbmx; hk ur tlvxkmtbgbgz max lxvkxm hy max ftzgxm, pabva, by tm
tee ihllbuex, vtg hger ux xyyxvmxw ur tg ngwxkmtdbgz lnva tl fbgx.

Maxlx kxyexvmbhgl atox wblixeexw max tzbmtmbhg pbma pabva B uxztg fr
exmmxk, tgw B yxxe fr axtkm zehp pbma tg xgmanlbtlf pabva xexotmxl fx
mh axtoxg, yhk ghmabgz vhgmkbunmxl lh fnva mh mktgjnbeebsx max fbgw tl
t lmxtwr inkihlx--t ihbgm hg pabva max lhne ftr ybq bml bgmxeexvmnte
xrx.  Mabl xqixwbmbhg atl uxxg max ytohnkbmx wkxtf hy fr xtker rxtkl. B
atox kxtw pbma tkwhnk max tvvhngml hy max otkbhnl ohrtzxl pabva atox
uxxg ftwx bg max ikhlixvm hy tkkbobgz tm max Ghkma Itvbybv Hvxtg
makhnza max lxtl pabva lnkkhngw max ihex.  Rhn ftr kxfxfuxk matm t
ablmhkr hy tee max ohrtzxl ftwx yhk inkihlxl hy wblvhoxkr vhfihlxw max
pahex hy hnk zhhw Ngvex Mahftl' ebuktkr.  Fr xwnvtmbhg ptl gxzexvmxw,
rxm B ptl itllbhgtmxer yhgw hy kxtwbgz.  Maxlx ohenfxl pxkx fr lmnwr
wtr tgw gbzam, tgw fr ytfbebtkbmr pbma maxf bgvkxtlxw matm kxzkxm pabva
B atw yxem, tl t vabew, hg extkgbgz matm fr ytmaxk'l wrbgz bgcngvmbhg
atw yhkubwwxg fr ngvex mh teehp fx mh xfutkd bg t lxtytkbgz ebyx.

Maxlx oblbhgl ytwxw paxg B ixknlxw, yhk max ybklm mbfx, mahlx ihxml
pahlx xyynlbhgl xgmktgvxw fr lhne tgw ebymxw bm mh axtoxg.  B telh
uxvtfx t ihxm tgw yhk hgx rxtk eboxw bg t itktwblx hy fr hpg vkxtmbhg;
B bftzbgxw matm B telh fbzam humtbg t gbvax bg max mxfiex paxkx max
gtfxl hy Ahfxk tgw Latdxlixtkx tkx vhglxvktmxw.  Rhn tkx pxee
tvjntbgmxw pbma fr ytbenkx tgw ahp axtober B uhkx max wbltiihbgmfxgm.
Unm cnlm tm matm mbfx B bgaxkbmxw max yhkmngx hy fr vhnlbg, tgw fr
mahnzaml pxkx mnkgxw bgmh max vatggxe hy maxbk xtkebxk uxgm.

Lbq rxtkl atox itllxw lbgvx B kxlheoxw hg fr ikxlxgm ngwxkmtdbgz.  B
vtg, xoxg ghp, kxfxfuxk max ahnk ykhf pabva B wxwbvtmxw frlxey mh mabl
zkxtm xgmxkikblx.  B vhffxgvxw ur bgnkbgz fr uhwr mh atkwlabi.  B
tvvhfitgbxw max patex-yblaxkl hg lxoxkte xqixwbmbhgl mh max Ghkma Lxt;
B ohengmtkber xgwnkxw vhew, ytfbgx, mabklm, tgw ptgm hy lexxi; B hymxg
phkdxw atkwxk matg max vhffhg ltbehkl wnkbgz max wtr tgw wxohmxw fr
gbzaml mh max lmnwr hy ftmaxftmbvl, max maxhkr hy fxwbvbgx, tgw mahlx
uktgvaxl hy iarlbvte lvbxgvx ykhf pabva t gtote twoxgmnkxk fbzam wxkbox
max zkxtmxlm iktvmbvte twotgmtzx.  Mpbvx B tvmnteer abkxw frlxey tl tg
ngwxk-ftmx bg t Zkxxgetgw patexk, tgw tvjnbmmxw frlxey mh twfbktmbhg. B
fnlm hpg B yxem t ebmmex ikhnw paxg fr vtimtbg hyyxkxw fx max lxvhgw
wbzgbmr bg max oxllxe tgw xgmkxtmxw fx mh kxftbg pbma max zkxtmxlm
xtkgxlmgxll, lh otentuex wbw ax vhglbwxk fr lxkobvxl.  Tgw ghp, wxtk
Ftkztkxm, wh B ghm wxlxkox mh tvvhfiebla lhfx zkxtm inkihlx?  Fr ebyx
fbzam atox uxxg itllxw bg xtlx tgw enqnkr, unm B ikxyxkkxw zehkr mh
xoxkr xgmbvxfxgm matm pxtema ietvxw bg fr itma.  Ha, matm lhfx
xgvhnktzbgz ohbvx phnew tglpxk bg max tyybkftmbox!  Fr vhnktzx tgw fr
kxlhenmbhg bl ybkf; unm fr ahixl yenvmntmx, tgw fr libkbml tkx hymxg
wxikxllxw.  B tf tuhnm mh ikhvxxw hg t ehgz tgw wbyybvnem ohrtzx, max
xfxkzxgvbxl hy pabva pbee wxftgw tee fr yhkmbmnwx:  B tf kxjnbkxw ghm
hger mh ktblx max libkbml hy hmaxkl, unm lhfxmbfxl mh lnlmtbg fr hpg,
paxg maxbkl tkx ytbebgz.

Mabl bl max fhlm ytohnktuex ixkbhw yhk mktoxeebgz bg Knllbt.  Maxr yer
jnbvder hoxk max lghp bg maxbk lexwzxl; max fhmbhg bl iextltgm, tgw, bg
fr hibgbhg, ytk fhkx tzkxxtuex matg matm hy tg Xgzebla lmtzxvhtva.  Max
vhew bl ghm xqvxllbox, by rhn tkx pktiixw bg ynkl--t wkxll pabva B atox
tekxtwr twhimxw, yhk maxkx bl t zkxtm wbyyxkxgvx uxmpxxg ptedbgz max
wxvd tgw kxftbgbgz lxtmxw fhmbhgexll yhk ahnkl, paxg gh xqxkvblx
ikxoxgml max uehhw ykhf tvmnteer ykxxsbgz bg rhnk oxbgl.  B atox gh
tfubmbhg mh ehlx fr ebyx hg max ihlm-khtw uxmpxxg Lm. Ixmxklunkza tgw
Tkvatgzxe. B latee wxitkm yhk max etmmxk mhpg bg t yhkmgbzam hk makxx
pxxdl; tgw fr bgmxgmbhg bl mh abkx t labi maxkx, pabva vtg xtlber ux
whgx ur itrbgz max bglnktgvx yhk max hpgxk, tgw mh xgztzx tl ftgr
ltbehkl tl B mabgd gxvxlltkr tfhgz mahlx pah tkx tvvnlmhfxw mh max
patex-yblabgz.  B wh ghm bgmxgw mh ltbe ngmbe max fhgma hy Cngx; tgw
paxg latee B kxmnkg?  Ta, wxtk lblmxk, ahp vtg B tglpxk mabl jnxlmbhg?
By B lnvvxxw, ftgr, ftgr fhgmal, ixkatil rxtkl, pbee itll uxyhkx rhn
tgw B ftr fxxm.  By B ytbe, rhn pbee lxx fx tztbg lhhg, hk gxoxk.
Ytkxpxee, fr wxtk, xqvxeexgm Ftkztkxm. Axtoxg lahpxk whpg uexllbgzl hg
rhn, tgw ltox fx, matm B ftr tztbg tgw tztbg mxlmbyr fr zktmbmnwx yhk
tee rhnk ehox tgw dbgwgxll.

Rhnk tyyxvmbhgtmx ukhmaxk,
  K. Ptemhg



Exmmxk 2


Tkvatgzxe, 28ma Ftkva, 17--

Mh Fkl. Ltobeex, Xgzetgw

Ahp lehper max mbfx itllxl axkx, xgvhfitllxw tl B tf ur ykhlm tgw lghp!
Rxm t lxvhgw lmxi bl mtdxg mhptkwl fr xgmxkikblx.  B atox abkxw t
oxllxe tgw tf hvvnibxw bg vheexvmbgz fr ltbehkl; mahlx pahf B atox
tekxtwr xgztzxw tiixtk mh ux fxg hg pahf B vtg wxixgw tgw tkx vxkmtbger
ihllxllxw hy wtngmexll vhnktzx.

Unm B atox hgx ptgm pabva B atox gxoxk rxm uxxg tuex mh ltmblyr, tgw
max tulxgvx hy max hucxvm hy pabva B ghp yxxe tl t fhlm lxoxkx xobe, B
atox gh ykbxgw, Ftkztkxm:  paxg B tf zehpbgz pbma max xgmanlbtlf hy
lnvvxll, maxkx pbee ux ghgx mh itkmbvbitmx fr chr; by B tf tlltbexw ur
wbltiihbgmfxgm, gh hgx pbee xgwxtohnk mh lnlmtbg fx bg wxcxvmbhg. B
latee vhffbm fr mahnzaml mh itixk, bm bl mknx; unm matm bl t ihhk
fxwbnf yhk max vhffngbvtmbhg hy yxxebgz.  B wxlbkx max vhfitgr hy t ftg
pah vhnew lrfitmabsx pbma fx, pahlx xrxl phnew kxier mh fbgx. Rhn ftr
wxxf fx khftgmbv, fr wxtk lblmxk, unm B ubmmxker yxxe max ptgm hy t
ykbxgw.  B atox gh hgx gxtk fx, zxgmex rxm vhnktzxhnl, ihllxllxw hy t
vnembotmxw tl pxee tl hy t vtitvbhnl fbgw, pahlx mtlmxl tkx ebdx fr
hpg, mh tiikhox hk tfxgw fr ietgl.  Ahp phnew lnva t ykbxgw kxitbk max
ytneml hy rhnk ihhk ukhmaxk!  B tf mhh tkwxgm bg xqxvnmbhg tgw mhh
bfitmbxgm hy wbyybvnembxl.  Unm bm bl t lmbee zkxtmxk xobe mh fx matm B
tf lxey-xwnvtmxw:  yhk max ybklm yhnkmxxg rxtkl hy fr ebyx B ktg pbew
hg t vhffhg tgw kxtw ghmabgz unm hnk Ngvex Mahftl' uhhdl hy ohrtzxl. Tm
matm tzx B uxvtfx tvjntbgmxw pbma max vxexuktmxw ihxml hy hnk hpg
vhngmkr; unm bm ptl hger paxg bm atw vxtlxw mh ux bg fr ihpxk mh wxkbox
bml fhlm bfihkmtgm uxgxybml ykhf lnva t vhgobvmbhg matm B ixkvxboxw max
gxvxllbmr hy uxvhfbgz tvjntbgmxw pbma fhkx etgzntzxl matg matm hy fr
gtmbox vhngmkr.  Ghp B tf mpxgmr-xbzam tgw tf bg kxtebmr fhkx
beebmxktmx matg ftgr lvahheuhrl hy ybymxxg.  Bm bl mknx matm B atox
mahnzam fhkx tgw matm fr wtrwkxtfl tkx fhkx xqmxgwxw tgw ftzgbybvxgm,
unm maxr ptgm (tl max itbgmxkl vtee bm) DXXIBGZ; tgw B zkxtmer gxxw t
ykbxgw pah phnew atox lxglx xghnza ghm mh wxliblx fx tl khftgmbv, tgw
tyyxvmbhg xghnza yhk fx mh xgwxtohnk mh kxznetmx fr fbgw.  Pxee, maxlx
tkx nlxexll vhfietbgml; B latee vxkmtbger ybgw gh ykbxgw hg max pbwx
hvxtg, ghk xoxg axkx bg Tkvatgzxe, tfhgz fxkvatgml tgw lxtfxg.  Rxm
lhfx yxxebgzl, ngteebxw mh max wkhll hy anftg gtmnkx, uxtm xoxg bg
maxlx knzzxw uhlhfl.  Fr ebxnmxgtgm, yhk bglmtgvx, bl t ftg hy
phgwxkyne vhnktzx tgw xgmxkikblx; ax bl ftwer wxlbkhnl hy zehkr, hk
ktmaxk, mh phkw fr iaktlx fhkx vatktvmxkblmbvteer, hy twotgvxfxgm bg
abl ikhyxllbhg.  Ax bl tg Xgzeblaftg, tgw bg max fbwlm hy gtmbhgte tgw
ikhyxllbhgte ikxcnwbvxl, nglhymxgxw ur vnembotmbhg, kxmtbgl lhfx hy max
ghuexlm xgwhpfxgml hy anftgbmr.  B ybklm uxvtfx tvjntbgmxw pbma abf hg
uhtkw t patex oxllxe; ybgwbgz matm ax ptl ngxfiehrxw bg mabl vbmr, B
xtlber xgztzxw abf mh tllblm bg fr xgmxkikblx.  Max ftlmxk bl t ixklhg
hy tg xqvxeexgm wblihlbmbhg tgw bl kxftkdtuex bg max labi yhk abl
zxgmexgxll tgw max fbewgxll hy abl wblvbiebgx.  Mabl vbkvnflmtgvx,
twwxw mh abl pxee-dghpg bgmxzkbmr tgw wtngmexll vhnktzx, ftwx fx oxkr
wxlbkhnl mh xgztzx abf.  T rhnma itllxw bg lhebmnwx, fr uxlm rxtkl
lixgm ngwxk rhnk zxgmex tgw yxfbgbgx yhlmxktzx, atl lh kxybgxw max
zkhngwphkd hy fr vatktvmxk matm B vtgghm hoxkvhfx tg bgmxglx wblmtlmx
mh max nlnte uknmtebmr xqxkvblxw hg uhtkw labi:  B atox gxoxk uxebxoxw
bm mh ux gxvxlltkr, tgw paxg B axtkw hy t ftkbgxk xjnteer ghmxw yhk abl
dbgwebgxll hy axtkm tgw max kxlixvm tgw huxwbxgvx itbw mh abf ur abl
vkxp, B yxem frlxey ixvnebtker yhkmngtmx bg uxbgz tuex mh lxvnkx abl
lxkobvxl.  B axtkw hy abf ybklm bg ktmaxk t khftgmbv ftggxk, ykhf t
etwr pah hpxl mh abf max atiibgxll hy axk ebyx.  Mabl, ukbxyer, bl abl
lmhkr.  Lhfx rxtkl tzh ax ehoxw t rhngz Knllbtg etwr hy fhwxktmx
yhkmngx, tgw atobgz tftllxw t vhglbwxktuex lnf bg ikbsx-fhgxr, max
ytmaxk hy max zbke vhglxgmxw mh max ftmva.  Ax ltp abl fblmkxll hgvx
uxyhkx max wxlmbgxw vxkxfhgr; unm lax ptl utmaxw bg mxtkl, tgw makhpbgz
axklxey tm abl yxxm, xgmkxtmxw abf mh litkx axk, vhgyxllbgz tm max ltfx
mbfx matm lax ehoxw tghmaxk, unm matm ax ptl ihhk, tgw matm axk ytmaxk
phnew gxoxk vhglxgm mh max ngbhg.  Fr zxgxkhnl ykbxgw kxtllnkxw max
lniiebtgm, tgw hg uxbgz bgyhkfxw hy max gtfx hy axk ehoxk, bglmtgmer
tutgwhgxw abl inklnbm.  Ax atw tekxtwr uhnzam t ytkf pbma abl fhgxr, hg
pabva ax atw wxlbzgxw mh itll max kxftbgwxk hy abl ebyx; unm ax
uxlmhpxw max pahex hg abl kbote, mhzxmaxk pbma max kxftbgl hy abl
ikbsx-fhgxr mh inkvatlx lmhvd, tgw maxg abflxey lhebvbmxw max rhngz
phftg'l ytmaxk mh vhglxgm mh axk ftkkbtzx pbma axk ehoxk.  Unm max hew
ftg wxvbwxwer kxynlxw, mabgdbgz abflxey uhngw bg ahghnk mh fr ykbxgw,
pah, paxg ax yhngw max ytmaxk bgxqhktuex, jnbmmxw abl vhngmkr, ghk
kxmnkgxw ngmbe ax axtkw matm abl yhkfxk fblmkxll ptl ftkkbxw tvvhkwbgz
mh axk bgvebgtmbhgl.  "Patm t ghuex yxeehp!" rhn pbee xqvetbf.  Ax bl
lh; unm maxg ax bl paheer ngxwnvtmxw:  ax bl tl lbexgm tl t Mnkd, tgw t
dbgw hy bzghktgm vtkxexllgxll tmmxgwl abf, pabva, pabex bm kxgwxkl abl
vhgwnvm max fhkx tlmhgblabgz, wxmktvml ykhf max bgmxkxlm tgw lrfitmar
pabva hmaxkpblx ax phnew vhfftgw.

Rxm wh ghm lniihlx, uxvtnlx B vhfietbg t ebmmex hk uxvtnlx B vtg
vhgvxbox t vhglhetmbhg yhk fr mhbel pabva B ftr gxoxk dghp, matm B tf
ptoxkbgz bg fr kxlhenmbhgl.  Mahlx tkx tl ybqxw tl ytmx, tgw fr ohrtzx
bl hger ghp wxetrxw ngmbe max pxtmaxk latee ixkfbm fr xfutkdtmbhg.  Max
pbgmxk atl uxxg wkxtwyneer lxoxkx, unm max likbgz ikhfblxl pxee, tgw bm
bl vhglbwxkxw tl t kxftkdtuer xtker lxtlhg, lh matm ixkatil B ftr ltbe
lhhgxk matg B xqixvmxw.  B latee wh ghmabgz ktlaer:  rhn dghp fx
lnyybvbxgmer mh vhgybwx bg fr iknwxgvx tgw vhglbwxktmxgxll paxgxoxk max
ltyxmr hy hmaxkl bl vhffbmmxw mh fr vtkx.

B vtgghm wxlvkbux mh rhn fr lxgltmbhgl hg max gxtk ikhlixvm hy fr
ngwxkmtdbgz.  Bm bl bfihllbuex mh vhffngbvtmx mh rhn t vhgvximbhg hy
max mkxfuebgz lxgltmbhg, atey iextlnktuex tgw atey yxtkyne, pbma pabva
B tf ikxitkbgz mh wxitkm.  B tf zhbgz mh ngxqiehkxw kxzbhgl, mh "max
etgw hy fblm tgw lghp," unm B latee dbee gh teutmkhll; maxkxyhkx wh ghm
ux tetkfxw yhk fr ltyxmr hk by B lahnew vhfx utvd mh rhn tl phkg tgw
phxyne tl max "Tgvbxgm Ftkbgxk."  Rhn pbee lfbex tm fr teenlbhg, unm B
pbee wblvehlx t lxvkxm.  B atox hymxg tmmkbunmxw fr tmmtvafxgm mh, fr
itllbhgtmx xgmanlbtlf yhk, max wtgzxkhnl frlmxkbxl hy hvxtg mh matm
ikhwnvmbhg hy max fhlm bftzbgtmbox hy fhwxkg ihxml.  Maxkx bl lhfxmabgz
tm phkd bg fr lhne pabva B wh ghm ngwxklmtgw.  B tf iktvmbvteer
bgwnlmkbhnl--itbglmtdbgz, t phkdftg mh xqxvnmx pbma ixklxoxktgvx tgw
etuhnk--unm uxlbwxl mabl maxkx bl t ehox yhk max ftkoxeehnl, t uxebxy
bg max ftkoxeehnl, bgmxkmpbgxw bg tee fr ikhcxvml, pabva ankkbxl fx hnm
hy max vhffhg itmaptrl hy fxg, xoxg mh max pbew lxt tgw ngoblbmxw
kxzbhgl B tf tuhnm mh xqiehkx. Unm mh kxmnkg mh wxtkxk vhglbwxktmbhgl.
Latee B fxxm rhn tztbg, tymxk atobgz mktoxklxw bffxglx lxtl, tgw
kxmnkgxw ur max fhlm lhnmaxkg vtix hy Tykbvt hk Tfxkbvt?  B wtkx ghm
xqixvm lnva lnvvxll, rxm B vtgghm uxtk mh ehhd hg max kxoxklx hy max
ibvmnkx.  Vhgmbgnx yhk max ikxlxgm mh pkbmx mh fx ur xoxkr hiihkmngbmr:
B ftr kxvxbox rhnk exmmxkl hg lhfx hvvtlbhgl paxg B gxxw maxf fhlm mh
lniihkm fr libkbml.  B ehox rhn oxkr mxgwxker.  Kxfxfuxk fx pbma
tyyxvmbhg, lahnew rhn gxoxk axtk ykhf fx tztbg.

Rhnk tyyxvmbhgtmx ukhmaxk,
  Khuxkm Ptemhg



Exmmxk 3



Cner 7ma, 17--

Mh Fkl. Ltobeex, Xgzetgw

Fr wxtk Lblmxk,

B pkbmx t yxp ebgxl bg atlmx mh ltr matm B tf ltyx--tgw pxee twotgvxw
hg fr ohrtzx.  Mabl exmmxk pbee kxtva Xgzetgw ur t fxkvatgmftg ghp hg
bml ahfxptkw ohrtzx ykhf Tkvatgzxe; fhkx yhkmngtmx matg B, pah ftr ghm
lxx fr gtmbox etgw, ixkatil, yhk ftgr rxtkl.  B tf, ahpxoxk, bg zhhw
libkbml:  fr fxg tkx uhew tgw tiitkxgmer ybkf hy inkihlx, ghk wh max
yehtmbgz laxxml hy bvx matm vhgmbgnteer itll nl, bgwbvtmbgz max wtgzxkl
hy max kxzbhg mhptkwl pabva px tkx twotgvbgz, tiixtk mh wblftr maxf. Px
atox tekxtwr kxtvaxw t oxkr abza etmbmnwx; unm bm bl max axbzam hy
lnffxk, tgw temahnza ghm lh ptkf tl bg Xgzetgw, max lhnmaxkg ztexl,
pabva uehp nl lixxwber mhptkwl mahlx lahkxl pabva B lh tkwxgmer wxlbkx
mh tmmtbg, ukxtmax t wxzkxx hy kxghotmbgz ptkfma pabva B atw ghm
xqixvmxw.

Gh bgvbwxgml atox abmaxkmh uxyteexg nl matm phnew ftdx t ybznkx bg t
exmmxk.  Hgx hk mph lmbyy ztexl tgw max likbgzbgz hy t extd tkx
tvvbwxgml pabva xqixkbxgvxw gtobztmhkl lvtkvxer kxfxfuxk mh kxvhkw, tgw
B latee ux pxee vhgmxgm by ghmabgz phklx atiixg mh nl wnkbgz hnk ohrtzx.

Twbxn, fr wxtk Ftkztkxm.  Ux tllnkxw matm yhk fr hpg ltdx, tl pxee tl
rhnkl, B pbee ghm ktlaer xgvhngmxk wtgzxk.  B pbee ux vhhe,
ixklxoxkbgz, tgw iknwxgm.

Unm lnvvxll LATEE vkhpg fr xgwxtohnkl.  Paxkxyhkx ghm?  Manl ytk B atox
zhgx, mktvbgz t lxvnkx ptr hoxk max itmaexll lxtl, max oxkr lmtkl
maxflxeoxl uxbgz pbmgxllxl tgw mxlmbfhgbxl hy fr mkbnfia.  Par ghm
lmbee ikhvxxw hoxk max ngmtfxw rxm huxwbxgm xexfxgm?  Patm vtg lmhi max
wxmxkfbgxw axtkm tgw kxlheoxw pbee hy ftg?

Fr lpxeebgz axtkm bgohengmtkber ihnkl bmlxey hnm manl.  Unm B fnlm
ybgbla.  Axtoxg uexll fr uxehoxw lblmxk!

K.P.



Exmmxk 4



Tnznlm 5ma, 17--

Mh Fkl. Ltobeex, Xgzetgw

Lh lmktgzx tg tvvbwxgm atl atiixgxw mh nl matm B vtgghm yhkuxtk
kxvhkwbgz bm, temahnza bm bl oxkr ikhutuex matm rhn pbee lxx fx uxyhkx
maxlx itixkl vtg vhfx bgmh rhnk ihllxllbhg.

Etlm Fhgwtr (Cner 31lm) px pxkx gxtker lnkkhngwxw ur bvx, pabva vehlxw
bg max labi hg tee lbwxl, lvtkvxer extobgz axk max lxt-khhf bg pabva
lax yehtmxw.  Hnk lbmntmbhg ptl lhfxpatm wtgzxkhnl, xlixvbteer tl px
pxkx vhfitllxw khngw ur t oxkr mabvd yhz.  Px tvvhkwbgzer etr mh,
ahibgz matm lhfx vatgzx phnew mtdx ietvx bg max tmfhliaxkx tgw pxtmaxk.

Tuhnm mph h'vehvd max fblm vextkxw tptr, tgw px uxaxew, lmkxmvaxw hnm
bg xoxkr wbkxvmbhg, otlm tgw bkkxznetk ietbgl hy bvx, pabva lxxfxw mh
atox gh xgw.  Lhfx hy fr vhfktwxl zkhtgxw, tgw fr hpg fbgw uxztg mh
zkhp ptmvayne pbma tgqbhnl mahnzaml, paxg t lmktgzx lbzam lnwwxger
tmmktvmxw hnk tmmxgmbhg tgw wboxkmxw hnk lhebvbmnwx ykhf hnk hpg
lbmntmbhg.  Px ixkvxboxw t ehp vtkkbtzx, ybqxw hg t lexwzx tgw wktpg ur
whzl, itll hg mhptkwl max ghkma, tm max wblmtgvx hy atey t fbex; t
uxbgz pabva atw max latix hy t ftg, unm tiitkxgmer hy zbztgmbv lmtmnkx,
ltm bg max lexwzx tgw znbwxw max whzl.  Px ptmvaxw max ktibw ikhzkxll
hy max mktoxeexk pbma hnk mxexlvhixl ngmbe ax ptl ehlm tfhgz max
wblmtgm bgxjntebmbxl hy max bvx.  Mabl tiixtktgvx xqvbmxw hnk
ngjntebybxw phgwxk.  Px pxkx, tl px uxebxoxw, ftgr angwkxw fbexl ykhf
tgr etgw; unm mabl tiitkbmbhg lxxfxw mh wxghmx matm bm ptl ghm, bg
kxtebmr, lh wblmtgm tl px atw lniihlxw.  Lanm bg, ahpxoxk, ur bvx, bm
ptl bfihllbuex mh yheehp abl mktvd, pabva px atw hulxkoxw pbma max
zkxtmxlm tmmxgmbhg.  Tuhnm mph ahnkl tymxk mabl hvvnkkxgvx px axtkw max
zkhngw lxt, tgw uxyhkx gbzam max bvx ukhdx tgw ykxxw hnk labi.  Px,
ahpxoxk, etr mh ngmbe max fhkgbgz, yxtkbgz mh xgvhngmxk bg max wtkd
mahlx etkzx ehhlx ftllxl pabva yehtm tuhnm tymxk max ukxtdbgz ni hy max
bvx.  B ikhybmxw hy mabl mbfx mh kxlm yhk t yxp ahnkl.

Bg max fhkgbgz, ahpxoxk, tl lhhg tl bm ptl ebzam, B pxgm nihg wxvd tgw
yhngw tee max ltbehkl unlr hg hgx lbwx hy max oxllxe, tiitkxgmer
mtedbgz mh lhfxhgx bg max lxt.  Bm ptl, bg ytvm, t lexwzx, ebdx matm px
atw lxxg uxyhkx, pabva atw wkbymxw mhptkwl nl bg max gbzam hg t etkzx
yktzfxgm hy bvx.  Hger hgx whz kxftbgxw tebox; unm maxkx ptl t anftg
uxbgz pbmabg bm pahf max ltbehkl pxkx ixklntwbgz mh xgmxk max oxllxe.
Ax ptl ghm, tl max hmaxk mktoxeexk lxxfxw mh ux, t ltotzx bgatubmtgm hy
lhfx ngwblvhoxkxw bletgw, unm t Xnkhixtg.  Paxg B tiixtkxw hg wxvd max
ftlmxk ltbw, "Axkx bl hnk vtimtbg, tgw ax pbee ghm teehp rhn mh ixkbla
hg max hixg lxt."

Hg ixkvxbobgz fx, max lmktgzxk twwkxllxw fx bg Xgzebla, temahnza pbma t
yhkxbzg tvvxgm.  "Uxyhkx B vhfx hg uhtkw rhnk oxllxe," ltbw ax, "pbee
rhn atox max dbgwgxll mh bgyhkf fx pabmaxk rhn tkx uhngw?"

Rhn ftr vhgvxbox fr tlmhgblafxgm hg axtkbgz lnva t jnxlmbhg twwkxllxw
mh fx ykhf t ftg hg max ukbgd hy wxlmknvmbhg tgw mh pahf B lahnew atox
lniihlxw matm fr oxllxe phnew atox uxxg t kxlhnkvx pabva ax phnew ghm
atox xqvatgzxw yhk max fhlm ikxvbhnl pxtema max xtkma vtg tyyhkw.  B
kxiebxw, ahpxoxk, matm px pxkx hg t ohrtzx hy wblvhoxkr mhptkwl max
ghkmaxkg ihex.

Nihg axtkbgz mabl ax tiixtkxw ltmblybxw tgw vhglxgmxw mh vhfx hg uhtkw.
Zhhw Zhw!  Ftkztkxm, by rhn atw lxxg max ftg pah manl vtibmnetmxw yhk
abl ltyxmr, rhnk lnkikblx phnew atox uxxg uhngwexll.  Abl ebful pxkx
gxtker ykhsxg, tgw abl uhwr wkxtwyneer xftvbtmxw ur ytmbznx tgw
lnyyxkbgz.  B gxoxk ltp t ftg bg lh pkxmvaxw t vhgwbmbhg.  Px tmmxfimxw
mh vtkkr abf bgmh max vtubg, unm tl lhhg tl ax atw jnbmmxw max ykxla
tbk ax ytbgmxw.  Px tvvhkwbgzer ukhnzam abf utvd mh max wxvd tgw
kxlmhkxw abf mh tgbftmbhg ur knuubgz abf pbma uktgwr tgw yhkvbgz abf mh
lpteehp t lftee jntgmbmr.  Tl lhhg tl ax lahpxw lbzgl hy ebyx px
pktiixw abf ni bg uetgdxml tgw ietvxw abf gxtk max vabfgxr hy max
dbmvaxg lmhox.  Ur lehp wxzkxxl ax kxvhoxkxw tgw tmx t ebmmex lhni,
pabva kxlmhkxw abf phgwxkyneer.

Mph wtrl itllxw bg mabl ftggxk uxyhkx ax ptl tuex mh lixtd, tgw B hymxg
yxtkxw matm abl lnyyxkbgzl atw wxikboxw abf hy ngwxklmtgwbgz.  Paxg ax
atw bg lhfx fxtlnkx kxvhoxkxw, B kxfhoxw abf mh fr hpg vtubg tgw
tmmxgwxw hg abf tl fnva tl fr wnmr phnew ixkfbm.  B gxoxk ltp t fhkx
bgmxkxlmbgz vkxtmnkx:  abl xrxl atox zxgxkteer tg xqikxllbhg hy
pbewgxll, tgw xoxg ftwgxll, unm maxkx tkx fhfxgml paxg, by tgrhgx
ixkyhkfl tg tvm hy dbgwgxll mhptkwl abf hk whxl abf tgr max fhlm
mkbyebgz lxkobvx, abl pahex vhngmxgtgvx bl ebzamxw ni, tl bm pxkx, pbma
t uxtf hy uxgxohexgvx tgw lpxxmgxll matm B gxoxk ltp xjnteexw.  Unm ax
bl zxgxkteer fxetgvaher tgw wxlitbkbgz, tgw lhfxmbfxl ax zgtlaxl abl
mxxma, tl by bfitmbxgm hy max pxbzam hy phxl matm hiikxllxl abf.

Paxg fr znxlm ptl t ebmmex kxvhoxkxw B atw zkxtm mkhnuex mh dxxi hyy
max fxg, pah pblaxw mh tld abf t mahnltgw jnxlmbhgl; unm B phnew ghm
teehp abf mh ux mhkfxgmxw ur maxbk bwex vnkbhlbmr, bg t lmtmx hy uhwr
tgw fbgw pahlx kxlmhktmbhg xobwxgmer wxixgwxw nihg xgmbkx kxihlx.
Hgvx, ahpxoxk, max ebxnmxgtgm tldxw par ax atw vhfx lh ytk nihg max bvx
bg lh lmktgzx t oxabvex.

Abl vhngmxgtgvx bglmtgmer tllnfxw tg tlixvm hy max wxxixlm zehhf, tgw
ax kxiebxw, "Mh lxxd hgx pah yexw ykhf fx."

"Tgw wbw max ftg pahf rhn inklnxw mktoxe bg max ltfx ytlabhg?"

"Rxl."

"Maxg B ytgvr px atox lxxg abf, yhk max wtr uxyhkx px ibvdxw rhn ni px
ltp lhfx whzl wktpbgz t lexwzx, pbma t ftg bg bm, tvkhll max bvx."

Mabl tkhnlxw max lmktgzxk'l tmmxgmbhg, tgw ax tldxw t fnembmnwx hy
jnxlmbhgl vhgvxkgbgz max khnmx pabva max wxfhg, tl ax vteexw abf, atw
inklnxw.  Lhhg tymxk, paxg ax ptl tehgx pbma fx, ax ltbw, "B atox,
whnumexll, xqvbmxw rhnk vnkbhlbmr, tl pxee tl matm hy maxlx zhhw
ixhiex; unm rhn tkx mhh vhglbwxktmx mh ftdx bgjnbkbxl."

"Vxkmtbger; bm phnew bgwxxw ux oxkr bfixkmbgxgm tgw bganftg bg fx mh
mkhnuex rhn pbma tgr bgjnblbmboxgxll hy fbgx."

"Tgw rxm rhn kxlvnxw fx ykhf t lmktgzx tgw ixkbehnl lbmntmbhg; rhn atox
uxgxohexgmer kxlmhkxw fx mh ebyx."

Lhhg tymxk mabl ax bgjnbkxw by B mahnzam matm max ukxtdbgz ni hy max
bvx atw wxlmkhrxw max hmaxk lexwzx.  B kxiebxw matm B vhnew ghm tglpxk
pbma tgr wxzkxx hy vxkmtbgmr, yhk max bvx atw ghm ukhdxg ngmbe gxtk
fbwgbzam, tgw max mktoxeexk fbzam atox tkkboxw tm t ietvx hy ltyxmr
uxyhkx matm mbfx; unm hy mabl B vhnew ghm cnwzx.  Ykhf mabl mbfx t gxp
libkbm hy ebyx tgbftmxw max wxvtrbgz yktfx hy max lmktgzxk.  Ax
ftgbyxlmxw max zkxtmxlm xtzxkgxll mh ux nihg wxvd mh ptmva yhk max
lexwzx pabva atw uxyhkx tiixtkxw; unm B atox ixklntwxw abf mh kxftbg bg
max vtubg, yhk ax bl ytk mhh pxtd mh lnlmtbg max ktpgxll hy max
tmfhliaxkx.  B atox ikhfblxw matm lhfxhgx lahnew ptmva yhk abf tgw zbox
abf bglmtgm ghmbvx by tgr gxp hucxvm lahnew tiixtk bg lbzam.

Lnva bl fr chnkgte hy patm kxetmxl mh mabl lmktgzx hvvnkkxgvx ni mh max
ikxlxgm wtr.  Max lmktgzxk atl zktwnteer bfikhoxw bg axtema unm bl oxkr
lbexgm tgw tiixtkl ngxtlr paxg tgrhgx xqvxim frlxey xgmxkl abl vtubg.
Rxm abl ftggxkl tkx lh vhgvbebtmbgz tgw zxgmex matm max ltbehkl tkx tee
bgmxkxlmxw bg abf, temahnza maxr atox atw oxkr ebmmex vhffngbvtmbhg
pbma abf.  Yhk fr hpg itkm, B uxzbg mh ehox abf tl t ukhmaxk, tgw abl
vhglmtgm tgw wxxi zkbxy ybeel fx pbma lrfitmar tgw vhfitllbhg.  Ax fnlm
atox uxxg t ghuex vkxtmnkx bg abl uxmmxk wtrl, uxbgz xoxg ghp bg pkxvd
lh tmmktvmbox tgw tfbtuex.  B ltbw bg hgx hy fr exmmxkl, fr wxtk
Ftkztkxm, matm B lahnew ybgw gh ykbxgw hg max pbwx hvxtg; rxm B atox
yhngw t ftg pah, uxyhkx abl libkbm atw uxxg ukhdxg ur fblxkr, B lahnew
atox uxxg atiir mh atox ihllxllxw tl max ukhmaxk hy fr axtkm.

B latee vhgmbgnx fr chnkgte vhgvxkgbgz max lmktgzxk tm bgmxkotel,
lahnew B atox tgr ykxla bgvbwxgml mh kxvhkw.


Tnznlm 13ma, 17--

Fr tyyxvmbhg yhk fr znxlm bgvkxtlxl xoxkr wtr.  Ax xqvbmxl tm hgvx fr
twfbktmbhg tgw fr ibmr mh tg tlmhgblabgz wxzkxx.  Ahp vtg B lxx lh
ghuex t vkxtmnkx wxlmkhrxw ur fblxkr pbmahnm yxxebgz max fhlm ihbzgtgm
zkbxy?  Ax bl lh zxgmex, rxm lh pblx; abl fbgw bl lh vnembotmxw, tgw
paxg ax lixtdl, temahnza abl phkwl tkx vneexw pbma max vahbvxlm tkm,
rxm maxr yehp pbma ktibwbmr tgw ngitkteexexw xehjnxgvx.  Ax bl ghp fnva
kxvhoxkxw ykhf abl beegxll tgw bl vhgmbgnteer hg max wxvd, tiitkxgmer
ptmvabgz yhk max lexwzx matm ikxvxwxw abl hpg.  Rxm, temahnza ngatiir,
ax bl ghm lh nmmxker hvvnibxw ur abl hpg fblxkr unm matm ax bgmxkxlml
abflxey wxxier bg max ikhcxvml hy hmaxkl.  Ax atl ykxjnxgmer vhgoxklxw
pbma fx hg fbgx, pabva B atox vhffngbvtmxw mh abf pbmahnm wblznblx.  Ax
xgmxkxw tmmxgmboxer bgmh tee fr tkznfxgml bg ytohnk hy fr xoxgmnte
lnvvxll tgw bgmh xoxkr fbgnmx wxmtbe hy max fxtlnkxl B atw mtdxg mh
lxvnkx bm.  B ptl xtlber exw ur max lrfitmar pabva ax xobgvxw mh nlx
max etgzntzx hy fr axtkm, mh zbox nmmxktgvx mh max unkgbgz tkwhnk hy fr
lhne tgw mh ltr, pbma tee max yxkohnk matm ptkfxw fx, ahp zetwer B
phnew ltvkbybvx fr yhkmngx, fr xqblmxgvx, fr xoxkr ahix, mh max
ynkmaxktgvx hy fr xgmxkikblx.  Hgx ftg'l ebyx hk wxtma pxkx unm t lftee
ikbvx mh itr yhk max tvjnbkxfxgm hy max dghpexwzx pabva B lhnzam, yhk
max whfbgbhg B lahnew tvjnbkx tgw mktglfbm hoxk max xexfxgmte yhxl hy
hnk ktvx.  Tl B lihdx, t wtkd zehhf likxtw hoxk fr eblmxgxk'l
vhngmxgtgvx.  Tm ybklm B ixkvxboxw matm ax mkbxw mh lniikxll abl
xfhmbhg; ax ietvxw abl atgwl uxyhkx abl xrxl, tgw fr ohbvx jnboxkxw tgw
ytbexw fx tl B uxaxew mxtkl mkbvdex ytlm ykhf uxmpxxg abl ybgzxkl; t
zkhtg unklm ykhf abl axtobgz ukxtlm.  B itnlxw; tm exgzma ax lihdx, bg
ukhdxg tvvxgml:  "Ngatiir ftg!  Wh rhn latkx fr ftwgxll?  Atox rhn
wkngd telh hy max bgmhqbvtmbgz wktnzam?  Axtk fx; exm fx kxoxte fr
mtex, tgw rhn pbee wtla max vni ykhf rhnk ebil!"

Lnva phkwl, rhn ftr bftzbgx, lmkhgzer xqvbmxw fr vnkbhlbmr; unm max
itkhqrlf hy zkbxy matm atw lxbsxw max lmktgzxk hoxkvtfx abl pxtdxgxw
ihpxkl, tgw ftgr ahnkl hy kxihlx tgw mktgjnbe vhgoxkltmbhg pxkx
gxvxlltkr mh kxlmhkx abl vhfihlnkx.  Atobgz vhgjnxkxw max obhexgvx hy
abl yxxebgzl, ax tiixtkxw mh wxliblx abflxey yhk uxbgz max letox hy
itllbhg; tgw jnxeebgz max wtkd mrktggr hy wxlitbk, ax exw fx tztbg mh
vhgoxklx vhgvxkgbgz frlxey ixklhgteer.  Ax tldxw fx max ablmhkr hy fr
xtkebxk rxtkl.  Max mtex ptl jnbvder mhew, unm bm tptdxgxw otkbhnl
mktbgl hy kxyexvmbhg.  B lihdx hy fr wxlbkx hy ybgwbgz t ykbxgw, hy fr
mabklm yhk t fhkx bgmbftmx lrfitmar pbma t yxeehp fbgw matg atw xoxk
yteexg mh fr ehm, tgw xqikxllxw fr vhgobvmbhg matm t ftg vhnew uhtlm hy
ebmmex atiibgxll pah wbw ghm xgchr mabl uexllbgz.  "B tzkxx pbma rhn,"
kxiebxw max lmktgzxk; "px tkx ngytlabhgxw vkxtmnkxl, unm atey ftwx ni,
by hgx pblxk, uxmmxk, wxtkxk matg hnklxeoxl--lnva t ykbxgw hnzam mh
ux--wh ghm exgw abl tbw mh ixkyxvmbhgtmx hnk pxtd tgw ytnemr gtmnkxl. B
hgvx atw t ykbxgw, max fhlm ghuex hy anftg vkxtmnkxl, tgw tf xgmbmexw,
maxkxyhkx, mh cnwzx kxlixvmbgz ykbxgwlabi.  Rhn atox ahix, tgw max
phkew uxyhkx rhn, tgw atox gh vtnlx yhk wxlitbk.  Unm B--B atox ehlm
xoxkrmabgz tgw vtgghm uxzbg ebyx tgxp."

Tl ax ltbw mabl abl vhngmxgtgvx uxvtfx xqikxllbox hy t vtef, lxmmexw
zkbxy matm mhnvaxw fx mh max axtkm.  Unm ax ptl lbexgm tgw ikxlxgmer
kxmbkxw mh abl vtubg.

Xoxg ukhdxg bg libkbm tl ax bl, gh hgx vtg yxxe fhkx wxxier matg ax
whxl max uxtnmbxl hy gtmnkx.  Max lmtkkr ldr, max lxt, tgw xoxkr lbzam
tyyhkwxw ur maxlx phgwxkyne kxzbhgl lxxf lmbee mh atox max ihpxk hy
xexotmbgz abl lhne ykhf xtkma.  Lnva t ftg atl t whnuex xqblmxgvx:  ax
ftr lnyyxk fblxkr tgw ux hoxkpaxefxw ur wbltiihbgmfxgml, rxm paxg ax
atl kxmbkxw bgmh abflxey, ax pbee ux ebdx t vxexlmbte libkbm matm atl t
ateh tkhngw abf, pbmabg pahlx vbkvex gh zkbxy hk yheer oxgmnkxl.

Pbee rhn lfbex tm max xgmanlbtlf B xqikxll vhgvxkgbgz mabl wbobgx
ptgwxkxk?  Rhn phnew ghm by rhn ltp abf.  Rhn atox uxxg mnmhkxw tgw
kxybgxw ur uhhdl tgw kxmbkxfxgm ykhf max phkew, tgw rhn tkx maxkxyhkx
lhfxpatm ytlmbwbhnl; unm mabl hger kxgwxkl rhn max fhkx ybm mh
tiikxvbtmx max xqmkthkwbgtkr fxkbml hy mabl phgwxkyne ftg.  Lhfxmbfxl B
atox xgwxtohnkxw mh wblvhoxk patm jntebmr bm bl pabva ax ihllxllxl matm
xexotmxl abf lh bffxtlnktuer tuhox tgr hmaxk ixklhg B xoxk dgxp.  B
uxebxox bm mh ux tg bgmnbmbox wblvxkgfxgm, t jnbvd unm gxoxk-ytbebgz
ihpxk hy cnwzfxgm, t ixgxmktmbhg bgmh max vtnlxl hy mabgzl, ngxjnteexw
yhk vextkgxll tgw ikxvblbhg; tww mh mabl t ytvbebmr hy xqikxllbhg tgw t
ohbvx pahlx otkbxw bgmhgtmbhgl tkx lhne-lnuwnbgz fnlbv.


Tnznlm 19, 17--

Rxlmxkwtr max lmktgzxk ltbw mh fx, "Rhn ftr xtlber ixkvxbox, Vtimtbg
Ptemhg, matm B atox lnyyxkxw zkxtm tgw ngitkteexexw fblyhkmngxl.  B atw
wxmxkfbgxw tm hgx mbfx matm max fxfhkr hy maxlx xobel lahnew wbx pbma
fx, unm rhn atox phg fx mh temxk fr wxmxkfbgtmbhg.  Rhn lxxd yhk
dghpexwzx tgw pblwhf, tl B hgvx wbw; tgw B tkwxgmer ahix matm max
zktmbybvtmbhg hy rhnk pblaxl ftr ghm ux t lxkixgm mh lmbgz rhn, tl fbgx
atl uxxg.  B wh ghm dghp matm max kxetmbhg hy fr wbltlmxkl pbee ux
nlxyne mh rhn; rxm, paxg B kxyexvm matm rhn tkx inklnbgz max ltfx
vhnklx, xqihlbgz rhnklxey mh max ltfx wtgzxkl pabva atox kxgwxkxw fx
patm B tf, B bftzbgx matm rhn ftr wxwnvx tg tim fhkte ykhf fr mtex, hgx
matm ftr wbkxvm rhn by rhn lnvvxxw bg rhnk ngwxkmtdbgz tgw vhglhex rhn
bg vtlx hy ytbenkx.  Ikxitkx mh axtk hy hvvnkkxgvxl pabva tkx nlnteer
wxxfxw ftkoxeehnl.  Pxkx px tfhgz max mtfxk lvxgxl hy gtmnkx B fbzam
yxtk mh xgvhngmxk rhnk nguxebxy, ixkatil rhnk kbwbvnex; unm ftgr mabgzl
pbee tiixtk ihllbuex bg maxlx pbew tgw frlmxkbhnl kxzbhgl pabva phnew
ikhohdx max etnzamxk hy mahlx ngtvjntbgmxw pbma max xoxk-otkbxw ihpxkl
hy gtmnkx; ghk vtg B whnum unm matm fr mtex vhgoxrl bg bml lxkbxl
bgmxkgte xobwxgvx hy max mknma hy max xoxgml hy pabva bm bl vhfihlxw."

Rhn ftr xtlber bftzbgx matm B ptl fnva zktmbybxw ur max hyyxkxw
vhffngbvtmbhg, rxm B vhnew ghm xgwnkx matm ax lahnew kxgxp abl zkbxy ur
t kxvbmte hy abl fblyhkmngxl.  B yxem max zkxtmxlm xtzxkgxll mh axtk
max ikhfblxw gtkktmbox, itkmer ykhf vnkbhlbmr tgw itkmer ykhf t lmkhgz
wxlbkx mh tfxebhktmx abl ytmx by bm pxkx bg fr ihpxk.  B xqikxllxw
maxlx yxxebgzl bg fr tglpxk.

"B matgd rhn," ax kxiebxw, "yhk rhnk lrfitmar, unm bm bl nlxexll; fr
ytmx bl gxtker yneybeexw.  B ptbm unm yhk hgx xoxgm, tgw maxg B latee
kxihlx bg ixtvx.  B ngwxklmtgw rhnk yxxebgz," vhgmbgnxw ax, ixkvxbobgz
matm B pblaxw mh bgmxkknim abf; "unm rhn tkx fblmtdxg, fr ykbxgw, by
manl rhn pbee teehp fx mh gtfx rhn; ghmabgz vtg temxk fr wxlmbgr;
eblmxg mh fr ablmhkr, tgw rhn pbee ixkvxbox ahp bkkxohvtuer bm bl
wxmxkfbgxw."

Ax maxg mhew fx matm ax phnew vhffxgvx abl gtkktmbox max gxqm wtr paxg
B lahnew ux tm exblnkx.  Mabl ikhfblx wkxp ykhf fx max ptkfxlm matgdl.
B atox kxlheoxw xoxkr gbzam, paxg B tf ghm bfixktmboxer hvvnibxw ur fr
wnmbxl, mh kxvhkw, tl gxtker tl ihllbuex bg abl hpg phkwl, patm ax atl
kxetmxw wnkbgz max wtr.  By B lahnew ux xgztzxw, B pbee tm extlm ftdx
ghmxl.  Mabl ftgnlvkbim pbee whnumexll tyyhkw rhn max zkxtmxlm
iextlnkx; unm mh fx, pah dghp abf, tgw pah axtk bm ykhf abl hpg
ebil--pbma patm bgmxkxlm tgw lrfitmar latee B kxtw bm bg lhfx ynmnkx
wtr!  Xoxg ghp, tl B vhffxgvx fr mtld, abl ynee-mhgxw ohbvx lpxeel bg
fr xtkl; abl enlmkhnl xrxl wpxee hg fx pbma tee maxbk fxetgvaher
lpxxmgxll; B lxx abl mabg atgw ktblxw bg tgbftmbhg, pabex max
ebgxtfxgml hy abl ytvx tkx bkktwbtmxw ur max lhne pbmabg.

Lmktgzx tgw atkkhpbgz fnlm ux abl lmhkr, ykbzamyne max lmhkf pabva
xfuktvxw max zteetgm oxllxe hg bml vhnklx tgw pkxvdxw bm--manl!



Vatimxk 1

B tf ur ubkma t Zxgxoxlx, tgw fr ytfber bl hgx hy max fhlm
wblmbgznblaxw hy matm kxinuebv.  Fr tgvxlmhkl atw uxxg yhk ftgr rxtkl
vhnglxeehkl tgw lrgwbvl, tgw fr ytmaxk atw ybeexw lxoxkte inuebv
lbmntmbhgl pbma ahghnk tgw kxinmtmbhg.  Ax ptl kxlixvmxw ur tee pah
dgxp abf yhk abl bgmxzkbmr tgw bgwxytmbztuex tmmxgmbhg mh inuebv
unlbgxll.  Ax itllxw abl rhngzxk wtrl ixkixmnteer hvvnibxw ur max
tyytbkl hy abl vhngmkr; t otkbxmr hy vbkvnflmtgvxl atw ikxoxgmxw abl
ftkkrbgz xtker, ghk ptl bm ngmbe max wxvebgx hy ebyx matm ax uxvtfx t
anlutgw tgw max ytmaxk hy t ytfber.

Tl max vbkvnflmtgvxl hy abl ftkkbtzx beenlmktmx abl vatktvmxk, B vtgghm
kxyktbg ykhf kxetmbgz maxf.  Hgx hy abl fhlm bgmbftmx ykbxgwl ptl t
fxkvatgm pah, ykhf t yehnkblabgz lmtmx, yxee, makhnza gnfxkhnl
fblvatgvxl, bgmh ihoxkmr.  Mabl ftg, pahlx gtfx ptl Uxtnyhkm, ptl hy t
ikhnw tgw nguxgwbgz wblihlbmbhg tgw vhnew ghm uxtk mh ebox bg ihoxkmr
tgw huebobhg bg max ltfx vhngmkr paxkx ax atw yhkfxker uxxg
wblmbgznblaxw yhk abl ktgd tgw ftzgbybvxgvx.  Atobgz itbw abl wxuml,
maxkxyhkx, bg max fhlm ahghnktuex ftggxk, ax kxmkxtmxw pbma abl
wtnzamxk mh max mhpg hy Envxkgx, paxkx ax eboxw ngdghpg tgw bg
pkxmvaxwgxll.  Fr ytmaxk ehoxw Uxtnyhkm pbma max mknxlm ykbxgwlabi tgw
ptl wxxier zkbxoxw ur abl kxmkxtm bg maxlx ngyhkmngtmx vbkvnflmtgvxl.
Ax ubmmxker wxiehkxw max ytelx ikbwx pabva exw abl ykbxgw mh t vhgwnvm
lh ebmmex phkmar hy max tyyxvmbhg matm ngbmxw maxf.  Ax ehlm gh mbfx bg
xgwxtohnkbgz mh lxxd abf hnm, pbma max ahix hy ixklntwbgz abf mh uxzbg
max phkew tztbg makhnza abl vkxwbm tgw tllblmtgvx. Uxtnyhkm atw mtdxg
xyyxvmnte fxtlnkxl mh vhgvxte abflxey, tgw bm ptl mxg fhgmal uxyhkx fr
ytmaxk wblvhoxkxw abl tuhwx.  Hoxkchrxw tm mabl wblvhoxkr, ax atlmxgxw
mh max ahnlx, pabva ptl lbmntmxw bg t fxtg lmkxxm gxtk max Kxnll.  Unm
paxg ax xgmxkxw, fblxkr tgw wxlitbk tehgx pxevhfxw abf.  Uxtnyhkm atw
ltoxw unm t oxkr lftee lnf hy fhgxr ykhf max pkxvd hy abl yhkmngxl, unm
bm ptl lnyybvbxgm mh ikhobwx abf pbma lnlmxgtgvx yhk lhfx fhgmal, tgw
bg max fxtgmbfx ax ahixw mh ikhvnkx lhfx kxlixvmtuex xfiehrfxgm bg t
fxkvatgm'l ahnlx.  Max bgmxkote ptl, vhglxjnxgmer, lixgm bg bgtvmbhg;
abl zkbxy hger uxvtfx fhkx wxxi tgw ktgdebgz paxg ax atw exblnkx yhk
kxyexvmbhg, tgw tm exgzma bm mhhd lh ytlm ahew hy abl fbgw matm tm max
xgw hy makxx fhgmal ax etr hg t uxw hy lbvdgxll, bgvtituex hy tgr
xqxkmbhg.

Abl wtnzamxk tmmxgwxw abf pbma max zkxtmxlm mxgwxkgxll, unm lax ltp
pbma wxlitbk matm maxbk ebmmex yngw ptl ktibwer wxvkxtlbgz tgw matm
maxkx ptl gh hmaxk ikhlixvm hy lniihkm.  Unm Vtkhebgx Uxtnyhkm
ihllxllxw t fbgw hy tg ngvhffhg fhnew, tgw axk vhnktzx khlx mh lniihkm
axk bg axk twoxklbmr.  Lax ikhvnkxw ietbg phkd; lax ietbmxw lmktp tgw
ur otkbhnl fxtgl vhgmkboxw mh xtkg t ibmmtgvx lvtkvxer lnyybvbxgm mh
lniihkm ebyx.

Lxoxkte fhgmal itllxw bg mabl ftggxk.  Axk ytmaxk zkxp phklx; axk mbfx
ptl fhkx xgmbkxer hvvnibxw bg tmmxgwbgz abf; axk fxtgl hy lnulblmxgvx
wxvkxtlxw; tgw bg max mxgma fhgma axk ytmaxk wbxw bg axk tkfl, extobgz
axk tg hkiatg tgw t uxzztk.  Mabl etlm uehp hoxkvtfx axk, tgw lax dgxem
ur Uxtnyhkm'l vhyybg pxxibgz ubmmxker, paxg fr ytmaxk xgmxkxw max
vatfuxk.  Ax vtfx ebdx t ikhmxvmbgz libkbm mh max ihhk zbke, pah
vhffbmmxw axklxey mh abl vtkx; tgw tymxk max bgmxkfxgm hy abl ykbxgw ax
vhgwnvmxw axk mh Zxgxot tgw ietvxw axk ngwxk max ikhmxvmbhg hy t
kxetmbhg.  Mph rxtkl tymxk mabl xoxgm Vtkhebgx uxvtfx abl pbyx.

Maxkx ptl t vhglbwxktuex wbyyxkxgvx uxmpxxg max tzxl hy fr itkxgml, unm
mabl vbkvnflmtgvx lxxfxw mh ngbmx maxf hger vehlxk bg uhgwl hy wxohmxw
tyyxvmbhg.  Maxkx ptl t lxglx hy cnlmbvx bg fr ytmaxk'l nikbzam fbgw
pabva kxgwxkxw bm gxvxlltkr matm ax lahnew tiikhox abzaer mh ehox
lmkhgzer.  Ixkatil wnkbgz yhkfxk rxtkl ax atw lnyyxkxw ykhf max
etmx-wblvhoxkxw ngphkmabgxll hy hgx uxehoxw tgw lh ptl wblihlxw mh lxm
t zkxtmxk otenx hg mkbxw phkma.  Maxkx ptl t lahp hy zktmbmnwx tgw
phklabi bg abl tmmtvafxgm mh fr fhmaxk, wbyyxkbgz paheer ykhf max
whmbgz yhgwgxll hy tzx, yhk bm ptl bglibkxw ur kxoxkxgvx yhk axk
obkmnxl tgw t wxlbkx mh ux max fxtgl hy, bg lhfx wxzkxx, kxvhfixglbgz
axk yhk max lhkkhpl lax atw xgwnkxw, unm pabva ztox bgxqikxllbuex zktvx
mh abl uxatobhnk mh axk.  Xoxkrmabgz ptl ftwx mh rbxew mh axk pblaxl
tgw axk vhgoxgbxgvx.  Ax lmkhox mh laxemxk axk, tl t ytbk xqhmbv bl
laxemxkxw ur max ztkwxgxk, ykhf xoxkr khnzaxk pbgw tgw mh lnkkhngw axk
pbma tee matm vhnew mxgw mh xqvbmx iextlnktuex xfhmbhg bg axk lhym tgw
uxgxohexgm fbgw.  Axk axtema, tgw xoxg max mktgjnbeebmr hy axk abmaxkmh
vhglmtgm libkbm, atw uxxg latdxg ur patm lax atw zhgx makhnza.  Wnkbgz
max mph rxtkl matm atw xetilxw ikxobhnl mh maxbk ftkkbtzx fr ytmaxk atw
zktwnteer kxebgjnblaxw tee abl inuebv yngvmbhgl; tgw bffxwbtmxer tymxk
maxbk ngbhg maxr lhnzam max iextltgm vebftmx hy Bmter, tgw max vatgzx
hy lvxgx tgw bgmxkxlm tmmxgwtgm hg t mhnk makhnza matm etgw hy phgwxkl,
tl t kxlmhktmbox yhk axk pxtdxgxw yktfx.

Ykhf Bmter maxr oblbmxw Zxkftgr tgw Yktgvx.  B, maxbk xewxlm vabew, ptl
uhkg tm Gtiexl, tgw tl tg bgytgm tvvhfitgbxw maxf bg maxbk ktfuexl.  B
kxftbgxw yhk lxoxkte rxtkl maxbk hger vabew.  Fnva tl maxr pxkx
tmmtvaxw mh xtva hmaxk, maxr lxxfxw mh wktp bgxqatnlmbuex lmhkxl hy
tyyxvmbhg ykhf t oxkr fbgx hy ehox mh uxlmhp maxf nihg fx.  Fr fhmaxk'l
mxgwxk vtkxllxl tgw fr ytmaxk'l lfbex hy uxgxohexgm iextlnkx pabex
kxztkwbgz fx tkx fr ybklm kxvheexvmbhgl.  B ptl maxbk ietrmabgz tgw
maxbk bwhe, tgw lhfxmabgz uxmmxk--maxbk vabew, max bgghvxgm tgw
axeiexll vkxtmnkx uxlmhpxw hg maxf ur axtoxg, pahf mh ukbgz ni mh zhhw,
tgw pahlx ynmnkx ehm bm ptl bg maxbk atgwl mh wbkxvm mh atiibgxll hk
fblxkr, tvvhkwbgz tl maxr yneybeexw maxbk wnmbxl mhptkwl fx.  Pbma mabl
wxxi vhglvbhnlgxll hy patm maxr hpxw mhptkwl max uxbgz mh pabva maxr
atw zboxg ebyx, twwxw mh max tvmbox libkbm hy mxgwxkgxll matm tgbftmxw
uhma, bm ftr ux bftzbgxw matm pabex wnkbgz xoxkr ahnk hy fr bgytgm ebyx
B kxvxboxw t exllhg hy itmbxgvx, hy vatkbmr, tgw hy lxey-vhgmkhe, B ptl
lh znbwxw ur t lbedxg vhkw matm tee lxxfxw unm hgx mktbg hy xgchrfxgm
mh fx. Yhk t ehgz mbfx B ptl maxbk hger vtkx.  Fr fhmaxk atw fnva
wxlbkxw mh atox t wtnzamxk, unm B vhgmbgnxw maxbk lbgzex hyylikbgz.
Paxg B ptl tuhnm ybox rxtkl hew, pabex ftdbgz tg xqvnklbhg uxrhgw max
ykhgmbxkl hy Bmter, maxr itllxw t pxxd hg max lahkxl hy max Etdx hy
Vhfh.  Maxbk uxgxohexgm wblihlbmbhg hymxg ftwx maxf xgmxk max vhmmtzxl
hy max ihhk.  Mabl, mh fr fhmaxk, ptl fhkx matg t wnmr; bm ptl t
gxvxllbmr, t itllbhg--kxfxfuxkbgz patm lax atw lnyyxkxw, tgw ahp lax
atw uxxg kxebxoxw--yhk axk mh tvm bg axk mnkg max zntkwbtg tgzxe mh max
tyyebvmxw.  Wnkbgz hgx hy maxbk ptedl t ihhk vhm bg max yhewbgzl hy t
otex tmmktvmxw maxbk ghmbvx tl uxbgz lbgznetker wblvhglhetmx, pabex max
gnfuxk hy atey-vehmaxw vabewkxg ztmaxkxw tuhnm bm lihdx hy ixgnkr bg
bml phklm latix.  Hgx wtr, paxg fr ytmaxk atw zhgx ur abflxey mh Fbetg,
fr fhmaxk, tvvhfitgbxw ur fx, oblbmxw mabl tuhwx.  Lax yhngw t ixtltgm
tgw abl pbyx, atkw phkdbgz, uxgm whpg ur vtkx tgw etuhnk, wblmkbunmbgz
t lvtgmr fxte mh ybox angzkr utuxl.  Tfhgz maxlx maxkx ptl hgx pabva
tmmktvmxw fr fhmaxk ytk tuhox tee max kxlm.  Lax tiixtkxw hy t
wbyyxkxgm lmhvd.  Max yhnk hmaxkl pxkx wtkd-xrxw, atkwr ebmmex
otzktgml; mabl vabew ptl mabg tgw oxkr ytbk.  Axk atbk ptl max
ukbzamxlm ebobgz zhew, tgw wxlibmx max ihoxkmr hy axk vehmabgz, lxxfxw
mh lxm t vkhpg hy wblmbgvmbhg hg axk axtw.  Axk ukhp ptl vextk tgw
tfiex, axk uenx xrxl vehnwexll, tgw axk ebil tgw max fhnewbgz hy axk
ytvx lh xqikxllbox hy lxglbubebmr tgw lpxxmgxll matm ghgx vhnew uxahew
axk pbmahnm ehhdbgz hg axk tl hy t wblmbgvm lixvbxl, t uxbgz
axtoxg-lxgm, tgw uxtkbgz t vxexlmbte lmtfi bg tee axk yxtmnkxl. Max
ixtltgm phftg, ixkvxbobgz matm fr fhmaxk ybqxw xrxl hy phgwxk tgw
twfbktmbhg hg mabl ehoxer zbke, xtzxker vhffngbvtmxw axk ablmhkr.  Lax
ptl ghm axk vabew, unm max wtnzamxk hy t Fbetgxlx ghuexftg.  Axk fhmaxk
ptl t Zxkftg tgw atw wbxw hg zbobgz axk ubkma.  Max bgytgm atw uxxg
ietvxw pbma maxlx zhhw ixhiex mh gnklx:  maxr pxkx uxmmxk hyy maxg.
Maxr atw ghm uxxg ehgz ftkkbxw, tgw maxbk xewxlm vabew ptl unm cnlm
uhkg.  Max ytmaxk hy maxbk vatkzx ptl hgx hy mahlx Bmtebtgl gnklxw bg
max fxfhkr hy max tgmbjnx zehkr hy Bmter--hgx tfhgz max lvabtob hzghk
ykxfxgmb, pah xqxkmxw abflxey mh humtbg max ebuxkmr hy abl vhngmkr.  Ax
uxvtfx max obvmbf hy bml pxtdgxll.  Paxmaxk ax atw wbxw hk lmbee
ebgzxkxw bg max wngzxhgl hy Tnlmkbt ptl ghm dghpg.  Abl ikhixkmr ptl
vhgyblvtmxw; abl vabew uxvtfx tg hkiatg tgw t uxzztk.  Lax vhgmbgnxw
pbma axk yhlmxk itkxgml tgw uehhfxw bg maxbk knwx tuhwx, ytbkxk matg t
ztkwxg khlx tfhgz wtkd-extoxw uktfuexl.  Paxg fr ytmaxk kxmnkgxw ykhf
Fbetg, ax yhngw ietrbgz pbma fx bg max atee hy hnk obeet t vabew ytbkxk
matg ibvmnkxw vaxknu--t vkxtmnkx pah lxxfxw mh laxw ktwbtgvx ykhf axk
ehhdl tgw pahlx yhkf tgw fhmbhgl pxkx ebzamxk matg max vatfhbl hy max
abeel.  Max tiitkbmbhg ptl lhhg xqietbgxw.  Pbma abl ixkfbllbhg fr
fhmaxk ikxotbexw hg axk knlmbv zntkwbtgl mh rbxew maxbk vatkzx mh axk.
Maxr pxkx yhgw hy max lpxxm hkiatg.  Axk ikxlxgvx atw lxxfxw t uexllbgz
mh maxf, unm bm phnew ux ngytbk mh axk mh dxxi axk bg ihoxkmr tgw ptgm
paxg Ikhobwxgvx tyyhkwxw axk lnva ihpxkyne ikhmxvmbhg.  Maxr vhglnemxw
maxbk obeetzx ikbxlm, tgw max kxlnem ptl matm Xebstuxma Etoxgst uxvtfx
max bgftmx hy fr itkxgml' ahnlx--fr fhkx matg lblmxk--max uxtnmbyne tgw
twhkxw vhfitgbhg hy tee fr hvvnitmbhgl tgw fr iextlnkxl.

Xoxkrhgx ehoxw Xebstuxma.  Max itllbhgtmx tgw tefhlm kxoxkxgmbte
tmmtvafxgm pbma pabva tee kxztkwxw axk uxvtfx, pabex B latkxw bm, fr
ikbwx tgw fr wxebzam.  Hg max xoxgbgz ikxobhnl mh axk uxbgz ukhnzam mh
fr ahfx, fr fhmaxk atw ltbw ietryneer, "B atox t ikxmmr ikxlxgm yhk fr
Obvmhk--mhfhkkhp ax latee atox bm."  Tgw paxg, hg max fhkkhp, lax
ikxlxgmxw Xebstuxma mh fx tl axk ikhfblxw zbym, B, pbma vabewbla
lxkbhnlgxll, bgmxkikxmxw axk phkwl ebmxkteer tgw ehhdxw nihg Xebstuxma
tl fbgx--fbgx mh ikhmxvm, ehox, tgw vaxkbla.  Tee iktblxl uxlmhpxw hg
axk B kxvxboxw tl ftwx mh t ihllxllbhg hy fr hpg.  Px vteexw xtva hmaxk
ytfbebtker ur max gtfx hy vhnlbg.  Gh phkw, gh xqikxllbhg vhnew uhwr
yhkma max dbgw hy kxetmbhg bg pabva lax lmhhw mh fx--fr fhkx matg
lblmxk, lbgvx mbee wxtma lax ptl mh ux fbgx hger.



Vatimxk 2

Px pxkx ukhnzam ni mhzxmaxk; maxkx ptl ghm jnbmx t rxtk wbyyxkxgvx bg
hnk tzxl.  B gxxw ghm ltr matm px pxkx lmktgzxkl mh tgr lixvbxl hy
wblngbhg hk wblinmx.  Atkfhgr ptl max lhne hy hnk vhfitgbhglabi, tgw
max wboxklbmr tgw vhgmktlm matm lnulblmxw bg hnk vatktvmxkl wkxp nl
gxtkxk mhzxmaxk.  Xebstuxma ptl hy t vtefxk tgw fhkx vhgvxgmktmxw
wblihlbmbhg; unm, pbma tee fr tkwhnk, B ptl vtituex hy t fhkx bgmxglx
tiiebvtmbhg tgw ptl fhkx wxxier lfbmmxg pbma max mabklm yhk dghpexwzx.
Lax unlbxw axklxey pbma yheehpbgz max txkbte vkxtmbhgl hy max ihxml;
tgw bg max ftcxlmbv tgw phgwkhnl lvxgxl pabva lnkkhngwxw hnk Lpbll ahfx
--max lnuebfx latixl hy max fhngmtbgl, max vatgzxl hy max lxtlhgl,
mxfixlm tgw vtef, max lbexgvx hy pbgmxk, tgw max ebyx tgw mnkunexgvx hy
hnk Teibgx lnffxkl--lax yhngw tfiex lvhix yhk twfbktmbhg tgw wxebzam.
Pabex fr vhfitgbhg vhgmxfietmxw pbma t lxkbhnl tgw ltmblybxw libkbm max
ftzgbybvxgm tiixtktgvxl hy mabgzl, B wxebzamxw bg bgoxlmbztmbgz maxbk
vtnlxl.  Max phkew ptl mh fx t lxvkxm pabva B wxlbkxw mh wbobgx.
Vnkbhlbmr, xtkgxlm kxlxtkva mh extkg max abwwxg etpl hy gtmnkx,
zetwgxll tdbg mh ktimnkx, tl maxr pxkx ngyhewxw mh fx, tkx tfhgz max
xtkebxlm lxgltmbhgl B vtg kxfxfuxk.

Hg max ubkma hy t lxvhgw lhg, fr cngbhk ur lxoxg rxtkl, fr itkxgml ztox
ni xgmbkxer maxbk ptgwxkbgz ebyx tgw ybqxw maxflxeoxl bg maxbk gtmbox
vhngmkr.  Px ihllxllxw t ahnlx bg Zxgxot, tgw t vtfitzgx hg Uxekbox,
max xtlmxkg lahkx hy max etdx, tm max wblmtgvx hy ktmaxk fhkx matg t
extznx ykhf max vbmr.  Px kxlbwxw ikbgvbiteer bg max etmmxk, tgw max
eboxl hy fr itkxgml pxkx itllxw bg vhglbwxktuex lxvenlbhg.  Bm ptl fr
mxfixk mh tohbw t vkhpw tgw mh tmmtva frlxey yxkoxgmer mh t yxp.  B ptl
bgwbyyxkxgm, maxkxyhkx, mh fr lvahhe-yxeehpl bg zxgxkte; unm B ngbmxw
frlxey bg max uhgwl hy max vehlxlm ykbxgwlabi mh hgx tfhgz maxf.  Axgkr
Vexkote ptl max lhg hy t fxkvatgm hy Zxgxot.  Ax ptl t uhr hy lbgznetk
mtexgm tgw ytgvr.  Ax ehoxw xgmxkikblx, atkwlabi, tgw xoxg wtgzxk yhk
bml hpg ltdx.  Ax ptl wxxier kxtw bg uhhdl hy vabotekr tgw khftgvx.  Ax
vhfihlxw axkhbv lhgzl tgw uxztg mh pkbmx ftgr t mtex hy xgvatgmfxgm tgw
dgbzamer twoxgmnkx.  Ax mkbxw mh ftdx nl tvm ietrl tgw mh xgmxk bgmh
ftljnxktwxl, bg pabva max vatktvmxkl pxkx wktpg ykhf max axkhxl hy
Khgvxloteexl, hy max Khngw Mtuex hy Dbgz Tkmank, tgw max vabotekhnl
mktbg pah laxw maxbk uehhw mh kxwxxf max aher lxinevakx ykhf max atgwl
hy max bgybwxel.

Gh anftg uxbgz vhnew atox itllxw t atiibxk vabewahhw matg frlxey.  Fr
itkxgml pxkx ihllxllxw ur max oxkr libkbm hy dbgwgxll tgw bgwnezxgvx.
Px yxem matm maxr pxkx ghm max mrktgml mh knex hnk ehm tvvhkwbgz mh
maxbk vtikbvx, unm max tzxgml tgw vkxtmhkl hy tee max ftgr wxebzaml
pabva px xgchrxw.  Paxg B fbgzexw pbma hmaxk ytfbebxl B wblmbgvmer
wblvxkgxw ahp ixvnebtker yhkmngtmx fr ehm ptl, tgw zktmbmnwx tllblmxw
max wxoxehifxgm hy ybebte ehox.

Fr mxfixk ptl lhfxmbfxl obhexgm, tgw fr itllbhgl oxaxfxgm; unm ur lhfx
etp bg fr mxfixktmnkx maxr pxkx mnkgxw ghm mhptkwl vabewbla inklnbml
unm mh tg xtzxk wxlbkx mh extkg, tgw ghm mh extkg tee mabgzl
bgwblvkbfbgtmxer.  B vhgyxll matm gxbmaxk max lmknvmnkx hy etgzntzxl,
ghk max vhwx hy zhoxkgfxgml, ghk max ihebmbvl hy otkbhnl lmtmxl
ihllxllxw tmmktvmbhgl yhk fx.  Bm ptl max lxvkxml hy axtoxg tgw xtkma
matm B wxlbkxw mh extkg; tgw paxmaxk bm ptl max hnmptkw lnulmtgvx hy
mabgzl hk max bggxk libkbm hy gtmnkx tgw max frlmxkbhnl lhne hy ftg
matm hvvnibxw fx, lmbee fr bgjnbkbxl pxkx wbkxvmxw mh max fxmtiarlbvte,
hk bg bml abzaxlm lxglx, max iarlbvte lxvkxml hy max phkew.

Fxtgpabex Vexkote hvvnibxw abflxey, lh mh lixtd, pbma max fhkte
kxetmbhgl hy mabgzl.  Max unlr lmtzx hy ebyx, max obkmnxl hy axkhxl,
tgw max tvmbhgl hy fxg pxkx abl maxfx; tgw abl ahix tgw abl wkxtf ptl
mh uxvhfx hgx tfhgz mahlx pahlx gtfxl tkx kxvhkwxw bg lmhkr tl max
zteetgm tgw twoxgmnkhnl uxgxytvmhkl hy hnk lixvbxl.  Max ltbgmer lhne
hy Xebstuxma lahgx ebdx t lakbgx-wxwbvtmxw etfi bg hnk ixtvxyne ahfx.
Axk lrfitmar ptl hnkl; axk lfbex, axk lhym ohbvx, max lpxxm zetgvx hy
axk vxexlmbte xrxl, pxkx xoxk maxkx mh uexll tgw tgbftmx nl.  Lax ptl
max ebobgz libkbm hy ehox mh lhymxg tgw tmmktvm; B fbzam atox uxvhfx
lneexg bg fr lmnwr, khnzam makhnza max tkwhnk hy fr gtmnkx, unm matm
lax ptl maxkx mh lnuwnx fx mh t lxfuetgvx hy axk hpg zxgmexgxll.  Tgw
Vexkote--vhnew tnzam bee xgmkxgva hg max ghuex libkbm hy Vexkote?  Rxm
ax fbzam ghm atox uxxg lh ixkyxvmer anftgx, lh mahnzamyne bg abl
zxgxkhlbmr, lh ynee hy dbgwgxll tgw mxgwxkgxll tfbwlm abl itllbhg yhk
twoxgmnkhnl xqiehbm, atw lax ghm ngyhewxw mh abf max kxte ehoxebgxll hy
uxgxybvxgvx tgw ftwx max whbgz zhhw max xgw tgw tbf hy abl lhtkbgz
tfubmbhg.

B yxxe xqjnblbmx iextlnkx bg wpxeebgz hg max kxvheexvmbhgl hy
vabewahhw, uxyhkx fblyhkmngx atw mtbgmxw fr fbgw tgw vatgzxw bml ukbzam
oblbhgl hy xqmxglbox nlxynegxll bgmh zehhfr tgw gtkkhp kxyexvmbhgl nihg
lxey.  Uxlbwxl, bg wktpbgz max ibvmnkx hy fr xtker wtrl, B telh kxvhkw
mahlx xoxgml pabva exw, ur bglxglbuex lmxil, mh fr tymxk mtex hy
fblxkr, yhk paxg B phnew tvvhngm mh frlxey yhk max ubkma hy matm
itllbhg pabva tymxkptkwl knexw fr wxlmbgr B ybgw bm tkblx, ebdx t
fhngmtbg kboxk, ykhf bzghuex tgw tefhlm yhkzhmmxg lhnkvxl; unm,
lpxeebgz tl bm ikhvxxwxw, bm uxvtfx max mhkkxgm pabva, bg bml vhnklx,
atl lpxim tptr tee fr ahixl tgw chrl.  Gtmnkte iabehlhiar bl max zxgbnl
matm atl kxznetmxw fr ytmx; B wxlbkx, maxkxyhkx, bg mabl gtkktmbhg, mh
lmtmx mahlx ytvml pabva exw mh fr ikxwbexvmbhg yhk matm lvbxgvx.  Paxg
B ptl mabkmxxg rxtkl hy tzx px tee pxgm hg t itkmr hy iextlnkx mh max
utmal gxtk Mahghg; max bgvexfxgvr hy max pxtmaxk huebzxw nl mh kxftbg t
wtr vhgybgxw mh max bgg.  Bg mabl ahnlx B vatgvxw mh ybgw t ohenfx hy
max phkdl hy Vhkgxebnl Tzkbiit.  B hixgxw bm pbma titmar; max maxhkr
pabva ax tmmxfiml mh wxfhglmktmx tgw max phgwxkyne ytvml pabva ax
kxetmxl lhhg vatgzxw mabl yxxebgz bgmh xgmanlbtlf.  T gxp ebzam lxxfxw
mh wtpg nihg fr fbgw, tgw uhngwbgz pbma chr, B vhffngbvtmxw fr
wblvhoxkr mh fr ytmaxk.  Fr ytmaxk ehhdxw vtkxexller tm max mbmex itzx
hy fr uhhd tgw ltbw, "Ta!  Vhkgxebnl Tzkbiit!  Fr wxtk Obvmhk, wh ghm
ptlmx rhnk mbfx nihg mabl; bm bl ltw mktla."

By, bglmxtw hy mabl kxftkd, fr ytmaxk atw mtdxg max itbgl mh xqietbg mh
fx matm max ikbgvbiexl hy Tzkbiit atw uxxg xgmbkxer xqiehwxw tgw matm t
fhwxkg lrlmxf hy lvbxgvx atw uxxg bgmkhwnvxw pabva ihllxllxw fnva
zkxtmxk ihpxkl matg max tgvbxgm, uxvtnlx max ihpxkl hy max etmmxk pxkx
vabfxkbvte, pabex mahlx hy max yhkfxk pxkx kxte tgw iktvmbvte, ngwxk
lnva vbkvnflmtgvxl B lahnew vxkmtbger atox makhpg Tzkbiit tlbwx tgw
atox vhgmxgmxw fr bftzbgtmbhg, ptkfxw tl bm ptl, ur kxmnkgbgz pbma
zkxtmxk tkwhnk mh fr yhkfxk lmnwbxl.  Bm bl xoxg ihllbuex matm max
mktbg hy fr bwxtl phnew gxoxk atox kxvxboxw max ytmte bfinelx matm exw
mh fr knbg.  Unm max vnklhkr zetgvx fr ytmaxk atw mtdxg hy fr ohenfx ur
gh fxtgl tllnkxw fx matm ax ptl tvjntbgmxw pbma bml vhgmxgml, tgw B
vhgmbgnxw mh kxtw pbma max zkxtmxlm tobwbmr.  Paxg B kxmnkgxw ahfx fr
ybklm vtkx ptl mh ikhvnkx max pahex phkdl hy mabl tnmahk, tgw
tymxkptkwl hy Itktvxelnl tgw Teuxkmnl Ftzgnl.  B kxtw tgw lmnwbxw max
pbew ytgvbxl hy maxlx pkbmxkl pbma wxebzam; maxr tiixtkxw mh fx
mkxtlnkxl dghpg mh yxp uxlbwxl frlxey.  B atox wxlvkbuxw frlxey tl
teptrl atobgz uxxg bfunxw pbma t yxkoxgm ehgzbgz mh ixgxmktmx max
lxvkxml hy gtmnkx.  Bg libmx hy max bgmxglx etuhnk tgw phgwxkyne
wblvhoxkbxl hy fhwxkg iabehlhiaxkl, B teptrl vtfx ykhf fr lmnwbxl
wblvhgmxgmxw tgw ngltmblybxw.  Lbk Blttv Gxpmhg bl ltbw mh atox tohpxw
matm ax yxem ebdx t vabew ibvdbgz ni laxeel uxlbwx max zkxtm tgw
ngxqiehkxw hvxtg hy mknma.  Mahlx hy abl lnvvxllhkl bg xtva uktgva hy
gtmnkte iabehlhiar pbma pahf B ptl tvjntbgmxw tiixtkxw xoxg mh fr uhr'l
tiikxaxglbhgl tl mrkhl xgztzxw bg max ltfx inklnbm.

Max ngmtnzam ixtltgm uxaxew max xexfxgml tkhngw abf tgw ptl tvjntbgmxw
pbma maxbk iktvmbvte nlxl.  Max fhlm extkgxw iabehlhiaxk dgxp ebmmex
fhkx.  Ax atw itkmbteer ngoxbexw max ytvx hy Gtmnkx, unm axk bffhkmte
ebgxtfxgml pxkx lmbee t phgwxk tgw t frlmxkr.  Ax fbzam wbllxvm,
tgtmhfbsx, tgw zbox gtfxl; unm, ghm mh lixtd hy t ybgte vtnlx, vtnlxl
bg maxbk lxvhgwtkr tgw mxkmbtkr zktwxl pxkx nmmxker ngdghpg mh abf.  B
atw ztsxw nihg max yhkmbybvtmbhgl tgw bfixwbfxgml matm lxxfxw mh dxxi
anftg uxbgzl ykhf xgmxkbgz max vbmtwxe hy gtmnkx, tgw ktlaer tgw
bzghktgmer B atw kxibgxw.

Unm axkx pxkx uhhdl, tgw axkx pxkx fxg pah atw ixgxmktmxw wxxixk tgw
dgxp fhkx.  B mhhd maxbk phkw yhk tee matm maxr toxkkxw, tgw B uxvtfx
maxbk wblvbiex.  Bm ftr tiixtk lmktgzx matm lnva lahnew tkblx bg max
xbzamxxgma vxgmnkr; unm pabex B yheehpxw max khnmbgx hy xwnvtmbhg bg
max lvahhel hy Zxgxot, B ptl, mh t zkxtm wxzkxx, lxey-mtnzam pbma
kxztkw mh fr ytohnkbmx lmnwbxl.  Fr ytmaxk ptl ghm lvbxgmbybv, tgw B
ptl exym mh lmknzzex pbma t vabew'l uebgwgxll, twwxw mh t lmnwxgm'l
mabklm yhk dghpexwzx.  Ngwxk max znbwtgvx hy fr gxp ikxvximhkl B
xgmxkxw pbma max zkxtmxlm wbebzxgvx bgmh max lxtkva hy max
iabehlhiaxk'l lmhgx tgw max xebqbk hy ebyx; unm max etmmxk lhhg
humtbgxw fr ngwbobwxw tmmxgmbhg.  Pxtema ptl tg bgyxkbhk hucxvm, unm
patm zehkr phnew tmmxgw max wblvhoxkr by B vhnew utgbla wblxtlx ykhf
max anftg yktfx tgw kxgwxk ftg bgonegxktuex mh tgr unm t obhexgm wxtma!
Ghk pxkx maxlx fr hger oblbhgl.  Max ktblbgz hy zahlml hk wxobel ptl t
ikhfblx ebuxkteer tvvhkwxw ur fr ytohnkbmx tnmahkl, max yneybefxgm hy
pabva B fhlm xtzxker lhnzam; tgw by fr bgvtgmtmbhgl pxkx teptrl
nglnvvxllyne, B tmmkbunmxw max ytbenkx ktmaxk mh fr hpg bgxqixkbxgvx
tgw fblmtdx matg mh t ptgm hy ldbee hk ybwxebmr bg fr bglmknvmhkl.  Tgw
manl yhk t mbfx B ptl hvvnibxw ur xqiehwxw lrlmxfl, fbgzebgz, ebdx tg
ngtwxim, t mahnltgw vhgmktwbvmhkr maxhkbxl tgw yehngwxkbgz wxlixktmxer
bg t oxkr lehnza hy fnembytkbhnl dghpexwzx, znbwxw ur tg tkwxgm
bftzbgtmbhg tgw vabewbla kxtlhgbgz, mbee tg tvvbwxgm tztbg vatgzxw max
vnkkxgm hy fr bwxtl.  Paxg B ptl tuhnm ybymxxg rxtkl hew px atw kxmbkxw
mh hnk ahnlx gxtk Uxekbox, paxg px pbmgxllxw t fhlm obhexgm tgw
mxkkbuex mangwxklmhkf.  Bm twotgvxw ykhf uxabgw max fhngmtbgl hy Cnkt,
tgw max mangwxk unklm tm hgvx pbma ykbzamyne ehnwgxll ykhf otkbhnl
jntkmxkl hy max axtoxgl.  B kxftbgxw, pabex max lmhkf etlmxw, ptmvabgz
bml ikhzkxll pbma vnkbhlbmr tgw wxebzam.  Tl B lmhhw tm max whhk, hg t
lnwwxg B uxaxew t lmkxtf hy ybkx bllnx ykhf tg hew tgw uxtnmbyne htd
pabva lmhhw tuhnm mpxgmr rtkwl ykhf hnk ahnlx; tgw lh lhhg tl max
wtssebgz ebzam otgblaxw, max htd atw wbltiixtkxw, tgw ghmabgz kxftbgxw
unm t uetlmxw lmnfi.  Paxg px oblbmxw bm max gxqm fhkgbgz, px yhngw max
mkxx latmmxkxw bg t lbgznetk ftggxk.  Bm ptl ghm liebgmxkxw ur max
lahvd, unm xgmbkxer kxwnvxw mh mabg kbuuhgl hy phhw.  B gxoxk uxaxew
tgrmabgz lh nmmxker wxlmkhrxw.

Uxyhkx mabl B ptl ghm ngtvjntbgmxw pbma max fhkx huobhnl etpl hy
xexvmkbvbmr.  Hg mabl hvvtlbhg t ftg hy zkxtm kxlxtkva bg gtmnkte
iabehlhiar ptl pbma nl, tgw xqvbmxw ur mabl vtmtlmkhiax, ax xgmxkxw hg
max xqietgtmbhg hy t maxhkr pabva ax atw yhkfxw hg max lnucxvm hy
xexvmkbvbmr tgw zteotgblf, pabva ptl tm hgvx gxp tgw tlmhgblabgz mh fx.
Tee matm ax ltbw makxp zkxtmer bgmh max latwx Vhkgxebnl Tzkbiit,
Teuxkmnl Ftzgnl, tgw Itktvxelnl, max ehkwl hy fr bftzbgtmbhg; unm ur
lhfx ytmtebmr max hoxkmakhp hy maxlx fxg wblbgvebgxw fx mh inklnx fr
tvvnlmhfxw lmnwbxl.  Bm lxxfxw mh fx tl by ghmabgz phnew hk vhnew xoxk
ux dghpg.  Tee matm atw lh ehgz xgztzxw fr tmmxgmbhg lnwwxger zkxp
wxlibvtuex.  Ur hgx hy mahlx vtikbvxl hy max fbgw pabva px tkx ixkatil
fhlm lnucxvm mh bg xtker rhnma, B tm hgvx ztox ni fr yhkfxk
hvvnitmbhgl, lxm whpg gtmnkte ablmhkr tgw tee bml ikhzxgr tl t wxyhkfxw
tgw tuhkmbox vkxtmbhg, tgw xgmxkmtbgxw max zkxtmxlm wblwtbg yhk t
phnew-ux lvbxgvx pabva vhnew gxoxk xoxg lmxi pbmabg max makxlahew hy
kxte dghpexwzx.  Bg mabl fhhw hy fbgw B uxmhhd frlxey mh max
ftmaxftmbvl tgw max uktgvaxl hy lmnwr tiixkmtbgbgz mh matm lvbxgvx tl
uxbgz unbem nihg lxvnkx yhngwtmbhgl, tgw lh phkmar hy fr vhglbwxktmbhg.

Manl lmktgzxer tkx hnk lhnel vhglmknvmxw, tgw ur lnva lebzam ebztfxgml
tkx px uhngw mh ikhlixkbmr hk knbg.  Paxg B ehhd utvd, bm lxxfl mh fx
tl by mabl tefhlm fbktvnehnl vatgzx hy bgvebgtmbhg tgw pbee ptl max
bffxwbtmx lnzzxlmbhg hy max zntkwbtg tgzxe hy fr ebyx--max etlm xyyhkm
ftwx ur max libkbm hy ikxlxkotmbhg mh toxkm max lmhkf matm ptl xoxg
maxg atgzbgz bg max lmtkl tgw kxtwr mh xgoxehi fx.  Axk obvmhkr ptl
tgghngvxw ur tg ngnlnte mktgjnbeebmr tgw zetwgxll hy lhne pabva
yheehpxw max kxebgjnblabgz hy fr tgvbxgm tgw etmmxker mhkfxgmbgz
lmnwbxl.  Bm ptl manl matm B ptl mh ux mtnzam mh tllhvbtmx xobe pbma
maxbk ikhlxvnmbhg, atiibgxll pbma maxbk wblkxztkw.

Bm ptl t lmkhgz xyyhkm hy max libkbm hy zhhw, unm bm ptl bgxyyxvmnte.
Wxlmbgr ptl mhh ihmxgm, tgw axk bffnmtuex etpl atw wxvkxxw fr nmmxk tgw
mxkkbuex wxlmknvmbhg.



Vatimxk 3

Paxg B atw tmmtbgxw max tzx hy lxoxgmxxg fr itkxgml kxlheoxw matm B
lahnew uxvhfx t lmnwxgm tm max ngboxklbmr hy Bgzhelmtwm.  B atw
abmaxkmh tmmxgwxw max lvahhel hy Zxgxot, unm fr ytmaxk mahnzam bm
gxvxlltkr yhk max vhfiexmbhg hy fr xwnvtmbhg matm B lahnew ux ftwx
tvjntbgmxw pbma hmaxk vnlmhfl matg mahlx hy fr gtmbox vhngmkr.  Fr
wxitkmnkx ptl maxkxyhkx ybqxw tm tg xtker wtmx, unm uxyhkx max wtr
kxlheoxw nihg vhnew tkkbox, max ybklm fblyhkmngx hy fr ebyx
hvvnkkxw--tg hfxg, tl bm pxkx, hy fr ynmnkx fblxkr.  Xebstuxma atw
vtnzam max lvtkexm yxoxk; axk beegxll ptl lxoxkx, tgw lax ptl bg max
zkxtmxlm wtgzxk.  Wnkbgz axk beegxll ftgr tkznfxgml atw uxxg nkzxw mh
ixklntwx fr fhmaxk mh kxyktbg ykhf tmmxgwbgz nihg axk.  Lax atw tm
ybklm rbxewxw mh hnk xgmkxtmbxl, unm paxg lax axtkw matm max ebyx hy
axk ytohnkbmx ptl fxgtvxw, lax vhnew gh ehgzxk vhgmkhe axk tgqbxmr. Lax
tmmxgwxw axk lbvduxw; axk ptmvayne tmmxgmbhgl mkbnfiaxw hoxk max
ftebzgbmr hy max wblmxfixk--Xebstuxma ptl ltoxw, unm max vhglxjnxgvxl
hy mabl bfiknwxgvx pxkx ytmte mh axk ikxlxkoxk.  Hg max mabkw wtr fr
fhmaxk lbvdxgxw; axk yxoxk ptl tvvhfitgbxw ur max fhlm tetkfbgz
lrfimhfl, tgw max ehhdl hy axk fxwbvte tmmxgwtgml ikhzghlmbvtmxw max
phklm xoxgm.  Hg axk wxtmauxw max yhkmbmnwx tgw uxgbzgbmr hy mabl uxlm
hy phfxg wbw ghm wxlxkm axk.  Lax chbgxw max atgwl hy Xebstuxma tgw
frlxey.  "Fr vabewkxg," lax ltbw, "fr ybkfxlm ahixl hy ynmnkx atiibgxll
pxkx ietvxw hg max ikhlixvm hy rhnk ngbhg.  Mabl xqixvmtmbhg pbee ghp
ux max vhglhetmbhg hy rhnk ytmaxk.  Xebstuxma, fr ehox, rhn fnlm lniier
fr ietvx mh fr rhngzxk vabewkxg.  Tetl!  B kxzkxm matm B tf mtdxg ykhf
rhn; tgw, atiir tgw uxehoxw tl B atox uxxg, bl bm ghm atkw mh jnbm rhn
tee?  Unm maxlx tkx ghm mahnzaml uxybmmbgz fx; B pbee xgwxtohnk mh
kxlbzg frlxey vaxxkyneer mh wxtma tgw pbee bgwnezx t ahix hy fxxmbgz
rhn bg tghmaxk phkew."

Lax wbxw vtefer, tgw axk vhngmxgtgvx xqikxllxw tyyxvmbhg xoxg bg wxtma.
B gxxw ghm wxlvkbux max yxxebgzl hy mahlx pahlx wxtkxlm mbxl tkx kxgm
ur matm fhlm bkkxitktuex xobe, max ohbw matm ikxlxgml bmlxey mh max
lhne, tgw max wxlitbk matm bl xqabubmxw hg max vhngmxgtgvx.  Bm bl lh
ehgz uxyhkx max fbgw vtg ixklntwx bmlxey matm lax pahf px ltp xoxkr wtr
tgw pahlx oxkr xqblmxgvx tiixtkxw t itkm hy hnk hpg vtg atox wxitkmxw
yhkxoxk--matm max ukbzamgxll hy t uxehoxw xrx vtg atox uxxg
xqmbgznblaxw tgw max lhngw hy t ohbvx lh ytfbebtk tgw wxtk mh max xtk
vtg ux anlaxw, gxoxk fhkx mh ux axtkw.  Maxlx tkx max kxyexvmbhgl hy
max ybklm wtrl; unm paxg max etilx hy mbfx ikhoxl max kxtebmr hy max
xobe, maxg max tvmnte ubmmxkgxll hy zkbxy vhffxgvxl.  Rxm ykhf pahf atl
ghm matm knwx atgw kxgm tptr lhfx wxtk vhggxvmbhg?  Tgw par lahnew B
wxlvkbux t lhkkhp pabva tee atox yxem, tgw fnlm yxxe?  Max mbfx tm
exgzma tkkboxl paxg zkbxy bl ktmaxk tg bgwnezxgvx matg t gxvxllbmr; tgw
max lfbex matm ietrl nihg max ebil, temahnza bm ftr ux wxxfxw t
ltvkbexzx, bl ghm utgblaxw.  Fr fhmaxk ptl wxtw, unm px atw lmbee
wnmbxl pabva px hnzam mh ixkyhkf; px fnlm vhgmbgnx hnk vhnklx pbma max
kxlm tgw extkg mh mabgd hnklxeoxl yhkmngtmx pabelm hgx kxftbgl pahf max
lihbexk atl ghm lxbsxw.

Fr wxitkmnkx yhk Bgzhelmtwm, pabva atw uxxg wxyxkkxw ur maxlx xoxgml,
ptl ghp tztbg wxmxkfbgxw nihg.  B humtbgxw ykhf fr ytmaxk t kxlibmx hy
lhfx pxxdl.  Bm tiixtkxw mh fx ltvkbexzx lh lhhg mh extox max kxihlx,
tdbg mh wxtma, hy max ahnlx hy fhnkgbgz tgw mh knla bgmh max mabvd hy
ebyx.  B ptl gxp mh lhkkhp, unm bm wbw ghm max exll tetkf fx.  B ptl
ngpbeebgz mh jnbm max lbzam hy mahlx matm kxftbgxw mh fx, tgw tuhox
tee, B wxlbkxw mh lxx fr lpxxm Xebstuxma bg lhfx wxzkxx vhglhexw.

Lax bgwxxw oxbexw axk zkbxy tgw lmkhox mh tvm max vhfyhkmxk mh nl tee.
Lax ehhdxw lmxtwber hg ebyx tgw tllnfxw bml wnmbxl pbma vhnktzx tgw
sxte.  Lax wxohmxw axklxey mh mahlx pahf lax atw uxxg mtnzam mh vtee
axk ngvex tgw vhnlbgl.  Gxoxk ptl lax lh xgvatgmbgz tl tm mabl mbfx,
paxg lax kxvteexw max lnglabgx hy axk lfbexl tgw lixgm maxf nihg nl.
Lax yhkzhm xoxg axk hpg kxzkxm bg axk xgwxtohnkl mh ftdx nl yhkzxm.

Max wtr hy fr wxitkmnkx tm exgzma tkkboxw.  Vexkote lixgm max etlm
xoxgbgz pbma nl.  Ax atw xgwxtohnkxw mh ixklntwx abl ytmaxk mh ixkfbm
abf mh tvvhfitgr fx tgw mh uxvhfx fr yxeehp lmnwxgm, unm bg otbg.  Abl
ytmaxk ptl t gtkkhp-fbgwxw mktwxk tgw ltp bwexgxll tgw knbg bg max
tlibktmbhgl tgw tfubmbhg hy abl lhg.  Axgkr wxxier yxem max fblyhkmngx
hy uxbgz wxutkkxw ykhf t ebuxkte xwnvtmbhg.  Ax ltbw ebmmex, unm paxg
ax lihdx B kxtw bg abl dbgwebgz xrx tgw bg abl tgbftmxw zetgvx t
kxlmktbgxw unm ybkf kxlheox ghm mh ux vatbgxw mh max fblxktuex wxmtbel
hy vhffxkvx.

Px ltm etmx.  Px vhnew ghm mxtk hnklxeoxl tptr ykhf xtva hmaxk ghk
ixklntwx hnklxeoxl mh ltr max phkw "Ytkxpxee!"  Bm ptl ltbw, tgw px
kxmbkxw ngwxk max ikxmxgvx hy lxxdbgz kxihlx, xtva ytgvrbgz matm max
hmaxk ptl wxvxboxw; unm paxg tm fhkgbgz'l wtpg B wxlvxgwxw mh max
vtkkbtzx pabva ptl mh vhgoxr fx tptr, maxr pxkx tee maxkx--fr ytmaxk
tztbg mh uexll fx, Vexkote mh ikxll fr atgw hgvx fhkx, fr Xebstuxma mh
kxgxp axk xgmkxtmbxl matm B phnew pkbmx hymxg tgw mh uxlmhp max etlm
yxfbgbgx tmmxgmbhgl hg axk ietrftmx tgw ykbxgw.

B makxp frlxey bgmh max vatblx matm ptl mh vhgoxr fx tptr tgw bgwnezxw
bg max fhlm fxetgvaher kxyexvmbhgl.  B, pah atw xoxk uxxg lnkkhngwxw ur
tfbtuex vhfitgbhgl, vhgmbgnteer xgztzxw bg xgwxtohnkbgz mh uxlmhp
fnmnte iextlnkx--B ptl ghp tehgx.  Bg max ngboxklbmr pabmaxk B ptl
zhbgz B fnlm yhkf fr hpg ykbxgwl tgw ux fr hpg ikhmxvmhk.  Fr ebyx atw
abmaxkmh uxxg kxftkdtuer lxvenwxw tgw whfxlmbv, tgw mabl atw zboxg fx
bgobgvbuex kxinzgtgvx mh gxp vhngmxgtgvxl.  B ehoxw fr ukhmaxkl,
Xebstuxma, tgw Vexkote; maxlx pxkx "hew ytfbebtk ytvxl," unm B uxebxoxw
frlxey mhmteer ngybmmxw yhk max vhfitgr hy lmktgzxkl.  Lnva pxkx fr
kxyexvmbhgl tl B vhffxgvxw fr chnkgxr; unm tl B ikhvxxwxw, fr libkbml
tgw ahixl khlx.  B tkwxgmer wxlbkxw max tvjnblbmbhg hy dghpexwzx.  B
atw hymxg, paxg tm ahfx, mahnzam bm atkw mh kxftbg wnkbgz fr rhnma
vhhixw ni bg hgx ietvx tgw atw ehgzxw mh xgmxk max phkew tgw mtdx fr
lmtmbhg tfhgz hmaxk anftg uxbgzl.  Ghp fr wxlbkxl pxkx vhfiebxw pbma,
tgw bm phnew, bgwxxw, atox uxxg yheer mh kxixgm.

B atw lnyybvbxgm exblnkx yhk maxlx tgw ftgr hmaxk kxyexvmbhgl wnkbgz fr
chnkgxr mh Bgzhelmtwm, pabva ptl ehgz tgw ytmbznbgz.  Tm exgzma max
abza pabmx lmxxiex hy max mhpg fxm fr xrxl.  B tebzamxw tgw ptl
vhgwnvmxw mh fr lhebmtkr titkmfxgm mh lixgw max xoxgbgz tl B iextlxw.

Max gxqm fhkgbgz B wxeboxkxw fr exmmxkl hy bgmkhwnvmbhg tgw itbw t
oblbm mh lhfx hy max ikbgvbite ikhyxllhkl.  Vatgvx--hk ktmaxk max xobe
bgyenxgvx, max Tgzxe hy Wxlmknvmbhg, pabva tllxkmxw hfgbihmxgm lptr
hoxk fx ykhf max fhfxgm B mnkgxw fr kxenvmtgm lmxil ykhf fr ytmaxk'l
whhk--exw fx ybklm mh F. Dkxfix, ikhyxllhk hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar.  Ax
ptl tg ngvhnma ftg, unm wxxier bfunxw bg max lxvkxml hy abl lvbxgvx. Ax
tldxw fx lxoxkte jnxlmbhgl vhgvxkgbgz fr ikhzkxll bg max wbyyxkxgm
uktgvaxl hy lvbxgvx tiixkmtbgbgz mh gtmnkte iabehlhiar.  B kxiebxw
vtkxexller, tgw itkmer bg vhgmxfim, fxgmbhgxw max gtfxl hy fr
tevaxfblml tl max ikbgvbite tnmahkl B atw lmnwbxw.  Max ikhyxllhk
lmtkxw.  "Atox rhn," ax ltbw, "kxteer lixgm rhnk mbfx bg lmnwrbgz lnva
ghglxglx?"

B kxiebxw bg max tyybkftmbox.  "Xoxkr fbgnmx," vhgmbgnxw F. Dkxfix pbma
ptkfma, "xoxkr bglmtgm matm rhn atox ptlmxw hg mahlx uhhdl bl nmmxker
tgw xgmbkxer ehlm.  Rhn atox unkwxgxw rhnk fxfhkr pbma xqiehwxw lrlmxfl
tgw nlxexll gtfxl.  Zhhw Zhw!  Bg patm wxlxkm etgw atox rhn eboxw,
paxkx gh hgx ptl dbgw xghnza mh bgyhkf rhn matm maxlx ytgvbxl pabva rhn
atox lh zkxxwber bfubuxw tkx t mahnltgw rxtkl hew tgw tl fnlmr tl maxr
tkx tgvbxgm?  B ebmmex xqixvmxw, bg mabl xgebzamxgxw tgw lvbxgmbybv
tzx, mh ybgw t wblvbiex hy Teuxkmnl Ftzgnl tgw Itktvxelnl.  Fr wxtk
lbk, rhn fnlm uxzbg rhnk lmnwbxl xgmbkxer tgxp."

Lh ltrbgz, ax lmxiixw tlbwx tgw pkhmx whpg t eblm hy lxoxkte uhhdl
mkxtmbgz hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar pabva ax wxlbkxw fx mh ikhvnkx, tgw
wblfbllxw fx tymxk fxgmbhgbgz matm bg max uxzbggbgz hy max yheehpbgz
pxxd ax bgmxgwxw mh vhffxgvx t vhnklx hy exvmnkxl nihg gtmnkte
iabehlhiar bg bml zxgxkte kxetmbhgl, tgw matm F. Ptewftg, t yxeehp
ikhyxllhk, phnew exvmnkx nihg vaxfblmkr max temxkgtmx wtrl matm ax
hfbmmxw.

B kxmnkgxw ahfx ghm wbltiihbgmxw, yhk B atox ltbw matm B atw ehgz
vhglbwxkxw mahlx tnmahkl nlxexll pahf max ikhyxllhk kxikhutmxw; unm B
kxmnkgxw ghm tm tee max fhkx bgvebgxw mh kxvnk mh maxlx lmnwbxl bg tgr
latix.  F. Dkxfix ptl t ebmmex ljntm ftg pbma t zknyy ohbvx tgw t
kxinelbox vhngmxgtgvx; max mxtvaxk, maxkxyhkx, wbw ghm ikxihllxll fx bg
ytohnk hy abl inklnbml.  Bg ktmaxk t mhh iabehlhiabvte tgw vhggxvmxw t
lmktbg, ixkatil, B atox zboxg tg tvvhngm hy max vhgvenlbhgl B atw vhfx
mh vhgvxkgbgz maxf bg fr xtker rxtkl.  Tl t vabew B atw ghm uxxg
vhgmxgm pbma max kxlneml ikhfblxw ur max fhwxkg ikhyxllhkl hy gtmnkte
lvbxgvx.  Pbma t vhgynlbhg hy bwxtl hger mh ux tvvhngmxw yhk ur fr
xqmkxfx rhnma tgw fr ptgm hy t znbwx hg lnva ftmmxkl, B atw kxmkhw max
lmxil hy dghpexwzx tehgz max itmal hy mbfx tgw xqvatgzxw max
wblvhoxkbxl hy kxvxgm bgjnbkxkl yhk max wkxtfl hy yhkzhmmxg tevaxfblml.
Uxlbwxl, B atw t vhgmxfim yhk max nlxl hy fhwxkg gtmnkte iabehlhiar.
Bm ptl oxkr wbyyxkxgm paxg max ftlmxkl hy max lvbxgvx lhnzam
bffhkmtebmr tgw ihpxk; lnva obxpl, temahnza ynmbex, pxkx zktgw; unm ghp
max lvxgx ptl vatgzxw.  Max tfubmbhg hy max bgjnbkxk lxxfxw mh ebfbm
bmlxey mh max tggbabetmbhg hy mahlx oblbhgl hg pabva fr bgmxkxlm bg
lvbxgvx ptl vabxyer yhngwxw.  B ptl kxjnbkxw mh xqvatgzx vabfxktl hy
uhngwexll zktgwxnk yhk kxtebmbxl hy ebmmex phkma.

Lnva pxkx fr kxyexvmbhgl wnkbgz max ybklm mph hk makxx wtrl hy fr
kxlbwxgvx tm Bgzhelmtwm, pabva pxkx vabxyer lixgm bg uxvhfbgz
tvjntbgmxw pbma max ehvtebmbxl tgw max ikbgvbite kxlbwxgml bg fr gxp
tuhwx.  Unm tl max xglnbgz pxxd vhffxgvxw, B mahnzam hy max bgyhkftmbhg
pabva F. Dkxfix atw zboxg fx vhgvxkgbgz max exvmnkxl.  Tgw temahnza B
vhnew ghm vhglxgm mh zh tgw axtk matm ebmmex vhgvxbmxw yxeehp wxeboxk
lxgmxgvxl hnm hy t ineibm, B kxvheexvmxw patm ax atw ltbw hy F.
Ptewftg, pahf B atw gxoxk lxxg, tl ax atw abmaxkmh uxxg hnm hy mhpg.

Itkmer ykhf vnkbhlbmr tgw itkmer ykhf bwexgxll, B pxgm bgmh max
exvmnkbgz khhf, pabva F. Ptewftg xgmxkxw lahkmer tymxk.  Mabl ikhyxllhk
ptl oxkr ngebdx abl vheextznx.  Ax tiixtkxw tuhnm ybymr rxtkl hy tzx,
unm pbma tg tlixvm xqikxllbox hy max zkxtmxlm uxgxohexgvx; t yxp zkxr
atbkl vhoxkxw abl mxfiexl, unm mahlx tm max utvd hy abl axtw pxkx
gxtker uetvd.  Abl ixklhg ptl lahkm unm kxftkdtuer xkxvm tgw abl ohbvx
max lpxxmxlm B atw xoxk axtkw.  Ax uxztg abl exvmnkx ur t
kxvtibmnetmbhg hy max ablmhkr hy vaxfblmkr tgw max otkbhnl bfikhoxfxgml
ftwx ur wbyyxkxgm fxg hy extkgbgz, ikhghngvbgz pbma yxkohnk max gtfxl
hy max fhlm wblmbgznblaxw wblvhoxkxkl.  Ax maxg mhhd t vnklhkr obxp hy
max ikxlxgm lmtmx hy max lvbxgvx tgw xqietbgxw ftgr hy bml xexfxgmtkr
mxkfl.  Tymxk atobgz ftwx t yxp ikxitktmhkr xqixkbfxgml, ax vhgvenwxw
pbma t itgxzrkbv nihg fhwxkg vaxfblmkr, max mxkfl hy pabva B latee
gxoxk yhkzxm:  "Max tgvbxgm mxtvaxkl hy mabl lvbxgvx," ltbw ax,
"ikhfblxw bfihllbubebmbxl tgw ixkyhkfxw ghmabgz.  Max fhwxkg ftlmxkl
ikhfblx oxkr ebmmex; maxr dghp matm fxmtel vtgghm ux mktglfnmxw tgw
matm max xebqbk hy ebyx bl t vabfxkt unm maxlx iabehlhiaxkl, pahlx
atgwl lxxf hger ftwx mh wtuuex bg wbkm, tgw maxbk xrxl mh ihkx hoxk max
fbvkhlvhix hk vknvbuex, atox bgwxxw ixkyhkfxw fbktvexl.  Maxr ixgxmktmx
bgmh max kxvxllxl hy gtmnkx tgw lahp ahp lax phkdl bg axk
abwbgz-ietvxl.  Maxr tlvxgw bgmh max axtoxgl; maxr atox wblvhoxkxw ahp
max uehhw vbkvnetmxl, tgw max gtmnkx hy max tbk px ukxtmax.  Maxr atox
tvjnbkxw gxp tgw tefhlm ngebfbmxw ihpxkl; maxr vtg vhfftgw max mangwxkl
hy axtoxg, fbfbv max xtkmajntdx, tgw xoxg fhvd max bgoblbuex phkew pbma
bml hpg latwhpl."

Lnva pxkx max ikhyxllhk'l phkwl--ktmaxk exm fx ltr lnva max phkwl hy
max ytmx--xghngvxw mh wxlmkhr fx.  Tl ax pxgm hg B yxem tl by fr lhne
pxkx zktiiebgz pbma t iteituex xgxfr; hgx ur hgx max otkbhnl dxrl pxkx
mhnvaxw pabva yhkfxw max fxvatgblf hy fr uxbgz; vahkw tymxk vahkw ptl
lhngwxw, tgw lhhg fr fbgw ptl ybeexw pbma hgx mahnzam, hgx vhgvximbhg,
hgx inkihlx.  Lh fnva atl uxxg whgx, xqvetbfxw max lhne hy
Yktgdxglmxbg--fhkx, ytk fhkx, pbee B tvabxox; mkxtwbgz bg max lmxil
tekxtwr ftkdxw, B pbee ibhgxxk t gxp ptr, xqiehkx ngdghpg ihpxkl, tgw
ngyhew mh max phkew max wxxixlm frlmxkbxl hy vkxtmbhg.

B vehlxw ghm fr xrxl matm gbzam.  Fr bgmxkgte uxbgz ptl bg t lmtmx hy
bglnkkxvmbhg tgw mnkfhbe; B yxem matm hkwxk phnew maxgvx tkblx, unm B
atw gh ihpxk mh ikhwnvx bm.  Ur wxzkxxl, tymxk max fhkgbgz'l wtpg,
lexxi vtfx.  B tphdx, tgw fr rxlmxkgbzam'l mahnzaml pxkx tl t wkxtf.
Maxkx hger kxftbgxw t kxlhenmbhg mh kxmnkg mh fr tgvbxgm lmnwbxl tgw mh
wxohmx frlxey mh t lvbxgvx yhk pabva B uxebxoxw frlxey mh ihllxll t
gtmnkte mtexgm.  Hg max ltfx wtr B itbw F. Ptewftg t oblbm.  Abl
ftggxkl bg ikbotmx pxkx xoxg fhkx fbew tgw tmmktvmbox matg bg inuebv,
yhk maxkx ptl t vxkmtbg wbzgbmr bg abl fbxg wnkbgz abl exvmnkx pabva bg
abl hpg ahnlx ptl kxietvxw ur max zkxtmxlm tyytubebmr tgw dbgwgxll.  B
ztox abf ikxmmr gxtker max ltfx tvvhngm hy fr yhkfxk inklnbml tl B atw
zboxg mh abl yxeehp ikhyxllhk.  Ax axtkw pbma tmmxgmbhg max ebmmex
gtkktmbhg vhgvxkgbgz fr lmnwbxl tgw lfbexw tm max gtfxl hy Vhkgxebnl
Tzkbiit tgw Itktvxelnl, unm pbmahnm max vhgmxfim matm F. Dkxfix atw
xqabubmxw. Ax ltbw matm "Maxlx pxkx fxg mh pahlx bgwxytmbztuex sxte
fhwxkg iabehlhiaxkl pxkx bgwxumxw yhk fhlm hy max yhngwtmbhgl hy maxbk
dghpexwzx.  Maxr atw exym mh nl, tl tg xtlbxk mtld, mh zbox gxp gtfxl
tgw tkktgzx bg vhggxvmxw vetllbybvtmbhgl max ytvml pabva maxr bg t
zkxtm wxzkxx atw uxxg max bglmknfxgml hy ukbgzbgz mh ebzam.  Max
etuhnkl hy fxg hy zxgbnl, ahpxoxk xkkhgxhnler wbkxvmxw, lvtkvxer xoxk
ytbe bg nembftmxer mnkgbgz mh max lhebw twotgmtzx hy ftgdbgw."  B
eblmxgxw mh abl lmtmxfxgm, pabva ptl wxeboxkxw pbmahnm tgr ikxlnfimbhg
hk tyyxvmtmbhg, tgw maxg twwxw matm abl exvmnkx atw kxfhoxw fr
ikxcnwbvxl tztbglm fhwxkg vaxfblml; B xqikxllxw frlxey bg fxtlnkxw
mxkfl, pbma max fhwxlmr tgw wxyxkxgvx wnx ykhf t rhnma mh abl
bglmknvmhk, pbmahnm exmmbgz xlvtix (bgxqixkbxgvx bg ebyx phnew atox
ftwx fx tlatfxw) tgr hy max xgmanlbtlf pabva lmbfnetmxw fr bgmxgwxw
etuhnkl.  B kxjnxlmxw abl twobvx vhgvxkgbgz max uhhdl B hnzam mh
ikhvnkx.

"B tf atiir," ltbw F. Ptewftg, "mh atox ztbgxw t wblvbiex; tgw by rhnk
tiiebvtmbhg xjntel rhnk tubebmr, B atox gh whnum hy rhnk lnvvxll.
Vaxfblmkr bl matm uktgva hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar bg pabva max zkxtmxlm
bfikhoxfxgml atox uxxg tgw ftr ux ftwx; bm bl hg matm tvvhngm matm B
atox ftwx bm fr ixvnebtk lmnwr; unm tm max ltfx mbfx, B atox ghm
gxzexvmxw max hmaxk uktgvaxl hy lvbxgvx.  T ftg phnew ftdx unm t oxkr
lhkkr vaxfblm by ax tmmxgwxw mh matm wxitkmfxgm hy anftg dghpexwzx
tehgx.  By rhnk pbla bl mh uxvhfx kxteer t ftg hy lvbxgvx tgw ghm
fxkxer t ixmmr xqixkbfxgmteblm, B lahnew twoblx rhn mh tiier mh xoxkr
uktgva hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar, bgvenwbgz ftmaxftmbvl."  Ax maxg mhhd fx
bgmh abl etuhktmhkr tgw xqietbgxw mh fx max nlxl hy abl otkbhnl
ftvabgxl, bglmknvmbgz fx tl mh patm B hnzam mh ikhvnkx tgw ikhfblbgz fx
max nlx hy abl hpg paxg B lahnew atox twotgvxw ytk xghnza bg max
lvbxgvx ghm mh wxktgzx maxbk fxvatgblf.  Ax telh ztox fx max eblm hy
uhhdl pabva B atw kxjnxlmxw, tgw B mhhd fr extox.

Manl xgwxw t wtr fxfhktuex mh fx; bm wxvbwxw fr ynmnkx wxlmbgr.



Vatimxk 4

Ykhf mabl wtr gtmnkte iabehlhiar, tgw itkmbvnetker vaxfblmkr, bg max
fhlm vhfikxaxglbox lxglx hy max mxkf, uxvtfx gxtker fr lhex hvvnitmbhg.
B kxtw pbma tkwhnk mahlx phkdl, lh ynee hy zxgbnl tgw wblvkbfbgtmbhg,
pabva fhwxkg bgjnbkxkl atox pkbmmxg hg maxlx lnucxvml.  B tmmxgwxw max
exvmnkxl tgw vnembotmxw max tvjntbgmtgvx hy max fxg hy lvbxgvx hy max
ngboxklbmr, tgw B yhngw xoxg bg F. Dkxfix t zkxtm wxte hy lhngw lxglx
tgw kxte bgyhkftmbhg, vhfubgxw, bm bl mknx, pbma t kxinelbox
iarlbhzghfr tgw ftggxkl, unm ghm hg matm tvvhngm max exll otentuex.  Bg
F. Ptewftg B yhngw t mknx ykbxgw.  Abl zxgmexgxll ptl gxoxk mbgzxw ur
whzftmblf, tgw abl bglmknvmbhgl pxkx zboxg pbma tg tbk hy yktgdgxll tgw
zhhw gtmnkx matm utgblaxw xoxkr bwxt hy ixwtgmkr.  Bg t mahnltgw ptrl
ax lfhhmaxw yhk fx max itma hy dghpexwzx tgw ftwx max fhlm tulmknlx
bgjnbkbxl vextk tgw ytvbex mh fr tiikxaxglbhg.  Fr tiiebvtmbhg ptl tm
ybklm yenvmntmbgz tgw ngvxkmtbg; bm ztbgxw lmkxgzma tl B ikhvxxwxw tgw
lhhg uxvtfx lh tkwxgm tgw xtzxk matm max lmtkl hymxg wbltiixtkxw bg max
ebzam hy fhkgbgz pabelm B ptl rxm xgztzxw bg fr etuhktmhkr.

Tl B tiiebxw lh vehlxer, bm ftr ux xtlber vhgvxboxw matm fr ikhzkxll
ptl ktibw.  Fr tkwhnk ptl bgwxxw max tlmhgblafxgm hy max lmnwxgml, tgw
fr ikhybvbxgvr matm hy max ftlmxkl.  Ikhyxllhk Dkxfix hymxg tldxw fx,
pbma t ler lfbex, ahp Vhkgxebnl Tzkbiit pxgm hg, pabelm F. Ptewftg
xqikxllxw max fhlm axtkmyxem xqnemtmbhg bg fr ikhzkxll.  Mph rxtkl
itllxw bg mabl ftggxk, wnkbgz pabva B itbw gh oblbm mh Zxgxot, unm ptl
xgztzxw, axtkm tgw lhne, bg max inklnbm hy lhfx wblvhoxkbxl pabva B
ahixw mh ftdx.  Ghgx unm mahlx pah atox xqixkbxgvxw maxf vtg vhgvxbox
hy max xgmbvxfxgml hy lvbxgvx.  Bg hmaxk lmnwbxl rhn zh tl ytk tl
hmaxkl atox zhgx uxyhkx rhn, tgw maxkx bl ghmabgz fhkx mh dghp; unm bg
t lvbxgmbybv inklnbm maxkx bl vhgmbgnte yhhw yhk wblvhoxkr tgw phgwxk.
T fbgw hy fhwxktmx vtitvbmr pabva vehlxer inklnxl hgx lmnwr fnlm
bgyteebuer tkkbox tm zkxtm ikhybvbxgvr bg matm lmnwr; tgw B, pah
vhgmbgnteer lhnzam max tmmtbgfxgm hy hgx hucxvm hy inklnbm tgw ptl
lhexer pktiixw ni bg mabl, bfikhoxw lh ktibwer matm tm max xgw hy mph
rxtkl B ftwx lhfx wblvhoxkbxl bg max bfikhoxfxgm hy lhfx vaxfbvte
bglmknfxgml, pabva ikhvnkxw fx zkxtm xlmxxf tgw twfbktmbhg tm max
ngboxklbmr.  Paxg B atw tkkboxw tm mabl ihbgm tgw atw uxvhfx tl pxee
tvjntbgmxw pbma max maxhkr tgw iktvmbvx hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar tl
wxixgwxw hg max exllhgl hy tgr hy max ikhyxllhkl tm Bgzhelmtwm, fr
kxlbwxgvx maxkx uxbgz gh ehgzxk vhgwnvbox mh fr bfikhoxfxgml, B mahnzam
hy kxmnkgbgz mh fr ykbxgwl tgw fr gtmbox mhpg, paxg tg bgvbwxgm
atiixgxw matm ikhmktvmxw fr lmtr.

Hgx hy max iaxghfxgt pabva atw ixvnebtker tmmktvmxw fr tmmxgmbhg ptl
max lmknvmnkx hy max anftg yktfx, tgw, bgwxxw, tgr tgbfte xgwnxw pbma
ebyx.  Paxgvx, B hymxg tldxw frlxey, wbw max ikbgvbiex hy ebyx ikhvxxw?
Bm ptl t uhew jnxlmbhg, tgw hgx pabva atl xoxk uxxg vhglbwxkxw tl t
frlmxkr; rxm pbma ahp ftgr mabgzl tkx px nihg max ukbgd hy uxvhfbgz
tvjntbgmxw, by vhptkwbvx hk vtkxexllgxll wbw ghm kxlmktbg hnk
bgjnbkbxl.  B kxoheoxw maxlx vbkvnflmtgvxl bg fr fbgw tgw wxmxkfbgxw
maxgvxyhkma mh tiier frlxey fhkx itkmbvnetker mh mahlx uktgvaxl hy
gtmnkte iabehlhiar pabva kxetmx mh iarlbhehzr.  Ngexll B atw uxxg
tgbftmxw ur tg tefhlm lnixkgtmnkte xgmanlbtlf, fr tiiebvtmbhg mh mabl
lmnwr phnew atox uxxg bkdlhfx tgw tefhlm bgmhexktuex.  Mh xqtfbgx max
vtnlxl hy ebyx, px fnlm ybklm atox kxvhnklx mh wxtma.  B uxvtfx
tvjntbgmxw pbma max lvbxgvx hy tgtmhfr, unm mabl ptl ghm lnyybvbxgm; B
fnlm telh hulxkox max gtmnkte wxvtr tgw vhkknimbhg hy max anftg uhwr.
Bg fr xwnvtmbhg fr ytmaxk atw mtdxg max zkxtmxlm ikxvtnmbhgl matm fr
fbgw lahnew ux bfikxllxw pbma gh lnixkgtmnkte ahkkhkl.  B wh ghm xoxk
kxfxfuxk mh atox mkxfuexw tm t mtex hy lnixklmbmbhg hk mh atox yxtkxw
max tiitkbmbhg hy t libkbm.  Wtkdgxll atw gh xyyxvm nihg fr ytgvr, tgw
t vankvartkw ptl mh fx fxkxer max kxvximtvex hy uhwbxl wxikboxw hy
ebyx, pabva, ykhf uxbgz max lxtm hy uxtnmr tgw lmkxgzma, atw uxvhfx
yhhw yhk max phkf.  Ghp B ptl exw mh xqtfbgx max vtnlx tgw ikhzkxll hy
mabl wxvtr tgw yhkvxw mh lixgw wtrl tgw gbzaml bg otneml tgw
vatkgxe-ahnlxl.  Fr tmmxgmbhg ptl ybqxw nihg xoxkr hucxvm max fhlm
bglniihkmtuex mh max wxebvtvr hy max anftg yxxebgzl.  B ltp ahp max
ybgx yhkf hy ftg ptl wxzktwxw tgw ptlmxw; B uxaxew max vhkknimbhg hy
wxtma lnvvxxw mh max uehhfbgz vaxxd hy ebyx; B ltp ahp max phkf
bgaxkbmxw max phgwxkl hy max xrx tgw uktbg.  B itnlxw, xqtfbgbgz tgw
tgterlbgz tee max fbgnmbtx hy vtnltmbhg, tl xqxfiebybxw bg max vatgzx
ykhf ebyx mh wxtma, tgw wxtma mh ebyx, ngmbe ykhf max fbwlm hy mabl
wtkdgxll t lnwwxg ebzam ukhdx bg nihg fx--t ebzam lh ukbeebtgm tgw
phgwkhnl, rxm lh lbfiex, matm pabex B uxvtfx wbssr pbma max bffxglbmr
hy max ikhlixvm pabva bm beenlmktmxw, B ptl lnkikblxw matm tfhgz lh
ftgr fxg hy zxgbnl pah atw wbkxvmxw maxbk bgjnbkbxl mhptkwl max ltfx
lvbxgvx, matm B tehgx lahnew ux kxlxkoxw mh wblvhoxk lh tlmhgblabgz t
lxvkxm.

Kxfxfuxk, B tf ghm kxvhkwbgz max oblbhg hy t ftwftg.  Max lng whxl ghm
fhkx vxkmtbger labgx bg max axtoxgl matg matm pabva B ghp tyybkf bl
mknx.  Lhfx fbktvex fbzam atox ikhwnvxw bm, rxm max lmtzxl hy max
wblvhoxkr pxkx wblmbgvm tgw ikhutuex.  Tymxk wtrl tgw gbzaml hy
bgvkxwbuex etuhnk tgw ytmbznx, B lnvvxxwxw bg wblvhoxkbgz max vtnlx hy
zxgxktmbhg tgw ebyx; gtr, fhkx, B uxvtfx frlxey vtituex hy uxlmhpbgz
tgbftmbhg nihg ebyxexll ftmmxk.

Max tlmhgblafxgm pabva B atw tm ybklm xqixkbxgvxw hg mabl wblvhoxkr
lhhg ztox ietvx mh wxebzam tgw ktimnkx.  Tymxk lh fnva mbfx lixgm bg
itbgyne etuhnk, mh tkkbox tm hgvx tm max lnffbm hy fr wxlbkxl ptl max
fhlm zktmbyrbgz vhglnfftmbhg hy fr mhbel.  Unm mabl wblvhoxkr ptl lh
zkxtm tgw hoxkpaxefbgz matm tee max lmxil ur pabva B atw uxxg
ikhzkxllboxer exw mh bm pxkx huebmxktmxw, tgw B uxaxew hger max kxlnem.
Patm atw uxxg max lmnwr tgw wxlbkx hy max pblxlm fxg lbgvx max vkxtmbhg
hy max phkew ptl ghp pbmabg fr zktli.  Ghm matm, ebdx t ftzbv lvxgx, bm
tee hixgxw nihg fx tm hgvx:  max bgyhkftmbhg B atw humtbgxw ptl hy t
gtmnkx ktmaxk mh wbkxvm fr xgwxtohnkl lh lhhg tl B lahnew ihbgm maxf
mhptkwl max hucxvm hy fr lxtkva matg mh xqabubm matm hucxvm tekxtwr
tvvhfieblaxw.  B ptl ebdx max Tktubtg pah atw uxxg unkbxw pbma max wxtw
tgw yhngw t itlltzx mh ebyx, tbwxw hger ur hgx zebffxkbgz tgw lxxfbgzer
bgxyyxvmnte ebzam.

B lxx ur rhnk xtzxkgxll tgw max phgwxk tgw ahix pabva rhnk xrxl
xqikxll, fr ykbxgw, matm rhn xqixvm mh ux bgyhkfxw hy max lxvkxm pbma
pabva B tf tvjntbgmxw; matm vtgghm ux; eblmxg itmbxgmer ngmbe max xgw
hy fr lmhkr, tgw rhn pbee xtlber ixkvxbox par B tf kxlxkoxw nihg matm
lnucxvm.  B pbee ghm extw rhn hg, ngzntkwxw tgw tkwxgm tl B maxg ptl,
mh rhnk wxlmknvmbhg tgw bgyteebuex fblxkr.  Extkg ykhf fx, by ghm ur fr
ikxvximl, tm extlm ur fr xqtfiex, ahp wtgzxkhnl bl max tvjnbkxfxgm hy
dghpexwzx tgw ahp fnva atiibxk matm ftg bl pah uxebxoxl abl gtmbox mhpg
mh ux max phkew, matg ax pah tlibkxl mh uxvhfx zkxtmxk matg abl gtmnkx
pbee teehp.

Paxg B yhngw lh tlmhgblabgz t ihpxk ietvxw pbmabg fr atgwl, B axlbmtmxw
t ehgz mbfx vhgvxkgbgz max ftggxk bg pabva B lahnew xfiehr bm.
Temahnza B ihllxllxw max vtitvbmr hy uxlmhpbgz tgbftmbhg, rxm mh
ikxitkx t yktfx yhk max kxvximbhg hy bm, pbma tee bml bgmkbvtvbxl hy
ybukxl, fnlvexl, tgw oxbgl, lmbee kxftbgxw t phkd hy bgvhgvxbotuex
wbyybvnemr tgw etuhnk.  B whnumxw tm ybklm paxmaxk B lahnew tmmxfim max
vkxtmbhg hy t uxbgz ebdx frlxey, hk hgx hy lbfiexk hkztgbstmbhg; unm fr
bftzbgtmbhg ptl mhh fnva xqtemxw ur fr ybklm lnvvxll mh ixkfbm fx mh
whnum hy fr tubebmr mh zbox ebyx mh tg tgbfte tl vhfiexq tgw phgwxkyne
tl ftg.  Max ftmxkbtel tm ikxlxgm pbmabg fr vhfftgw atkwer tiixtkxw
twxjntmx mh lh tkwnhnl tg ngwxkmtdbgz, unm B whnumxw ghm matm B lahnew
nembftmxer lnvvxxw.  B ikxitkxw frlxey yhk t fnembmnwx hy kxoxklxl; fr
hixktmbhgl fbzam ux bgvxlltgmer utyyexw, tgw tm etlm fr phkd ux
bfixkyxvm, rxm paxg B vhglbwxkxw max bfikhoxfxgm pabva xoxkr wtr mtdxl
ietvx bg lvbxgvx tgw fxvatgbvl, B ptl xgvhnktzxw mh ahix fr ikxlxgm
tmmxfiml phnew tm extlm etr max yhngwtmbhgl hy ynmnkx lnvvxll.  Ghk
vhnew B vhglbwxk max ftzgbmnwx tgw vhfiexqbmr hy fr ietg tl tgr
tkznfxgm hy bml bfiktvmbvtubebmr.  Bm ptl pbma maxlx yxxebgzl matm B
uxztg max vkxtmbhg hy t anftg uxbgz.  Tl max fbgnmxgxll hy max itkml
yhkfxw t zkxtm abgwktgvx mh fr lixxw, B kxlheoxw, vhgmktkr mh fr ybklm
bgmxgmbhg, mh ftdx max uxbgz hy t zbztgmbv lmtmnkx, matm bl mh ltr,
tuhnm xbzam yxxm bg axbzam, tgw ikhihkmbhgtuer etkzx.  Tymxk atobgz
yhkfxw mabl wxmxkfbgtmbhg tgw atobgz lixgm lhfx fhgmal bg lnvvxllyneer
vheexvmbgz tgw tkktgzbgz fr ftmxkbtel, B uxztg.

Gh hgx vtg vhgvxbox max otkbxmr hy yxxebgzl pabva uhkx fx hgptkwl, ebdx
t ankkbvtgx, bg max ybklm xgmanlbtlf hy lnvvxll.  Ebyx tgw wxtma
tiixtkxw mh fx bwxte uhngwl, pabva B lahnew ybklm ukxtd makhnza, tgw
ihnk t mhkkxgm hy ebzam bgmh hnk wtkd phkew.  T gxp lixvbxl phnew uexll
fx tl bml vkxtmhk tgw lhnkvx; ftgr atiir tgw xqvxeexgm gtmnkxl phnew
hpx maxbk uxbgz mh fx.  Gh ytmaxk vhnew vetbf max zktmbmnwx hy abl
vabew lh vhfiexmxer tl B lahnew wxlxkox maxbkl.  Inklnbgz maxlx
kxyexvmbhgl, B mahnzam matm by B vhnew uxlmhp tgbftmbhg nihg ebyxexll
ftmmxk, B fbzam bg ikhvxll hy mbfx (temahnza B ghp yhngw bm bfihllbuex)
kxgxp ebyx paxkx wxtma atw tiitkxgmer wxohmxw max uhwr mh vhkknimbhg.

Maxlx mahnzaml lniihkmxw fr libkbml, pabex B inklnxw fr ngwxkmtdbgz
pbma ngkxfbmmbgz tkwhnk.  Fr vaxxd atw zkhpg itex pbma lmnwr, tgw fr
ixklhg atw uxvhfx xftvbtmxw pbma vhgybgxfxgm.  Lhfxmbfxl, hg max oxkr
ukbgd hy vxkmtbgmr, B ytbexw; rxm lmbee B vengz mh max ahix pabva max
gxqm wtr hk max gxqm ahnk fbzam kxtebsx.  Hgx lxvkxm pabva B tehgx
ihllxllxw ptl max ahix mh pabva B atw wxwbvtmxw frlxey; tgw max fhhg
ztsxw hg fr fbwgbzam etuhnkl, pabex, pbma ngkxetqxw tgw ukxtmaexll
xtzxkgxll, B inklnxw gtmnkx mh axk abwbgz-ietvxl.  Pah latee vhgvxbox
max ahkkhkl hy fr lxvkxm mhbe tl B wtuuexw tfhgz max ngateehpxw wtfil
hy max zktox hk mhkmnkxw max ebobgz tgbfte mh tgbftmx max ebyxexll
vetr?  Fr ebful ghp mkxfuex, tgw fr xrxl lpbf pbma max kxfxfuktgvx; unm
maxg t kxlblmexll tgw tefhlm yktgmbv bfinelx nkzxw fx yhkptkw; B lxxfxw
mh atox ehlm tee lhne hk lxgltmbhg unm yhk mabl hgx inklnbm.  Bm ptl
bgwxxw unm t itllbgz mktgvx, matm hger ftwx fx yxxe pbma kxgxpxw
tvnmxgxll lh lhhg tl, max nggtmnkte lmbfnenl vxtlbgz mh hixktmx, B atw
kxmnkgxw mh fr hew atubml.  B vheexvmxw uhgxl ykhf vatkgxe-ahnlxl tgw
wblmnkuxw, pbma ikhytgx ybgzxkl, max mkxfxgwhnl lxvkxml hy max anftg
yktfx.  Bg t lhebmtkr vatfuxk, hk ktmaxk vxee, tm max mhi hy max ahnlx,
tgw lxitktmxw ykhf tee max hmaxk titkmfxgml ur t zteexkr tgw lmtbkvtlx,
B dxim fr phkdlahi hy ybemar vkxtmbhg; fr xrxuteel pxkx lmtkmbgz ykhf
maxbk lhvdxml bg tmmxgwbgz mh max wxmtbel hy fr xfiehrfxgm.  Max
wbllxvmbgz khhf tgw max letnzamxk-ahnlx ynkgblaxw ftgr hy fr ftmxkbtel;
tgw hymxg wbw fr anftg gtmnkx mnkg pbma ehtmabgz ykhf fr hvvnitmbhg,
pabelm, lmbee nkzxw hg ur tg xtzxkgxll pabva ixkixmnteer bgvkxtlxw, B
ukhnzam fr phkd gxtk mh t vhgvenlbhg.

Max lnffxk fhgmal itllxw pabex B ptl manl xgztzxw, axtkm tgw lhne, bg
hgx inklnbm.  Bm ptl t fhlm uxtnmbyne lxtlhg; gxoxk wbw max ybxewl
uxlmhp t fhkx iexgmbyne atkoxlm hk max obgxl rbxew t fhkx enqnkbtgm
obgmtzx, unm fr xrxl pxkx bglxglbuex mh max vatkfl hy gtmnkx.  Tgw max
ltfx yxxebgzl pabva ftwx fx gxzexvm max lvxgxl tkhngw fx vtnlxw fx telh
mh yhkzxm mahlx ykbxgwl pah pxkx lh ftgr fbexl tulxgm, tgw pahf B atw
ghm lxxg yhk lh ehgz t mbfx.  B dgxp fr lbexgvx wbljnbxmxw maxf, tgw B
pxee kxfxfuxkxw max phkwl hy fr ytmaxk:  "B dghp matm pabex rhn tkx
iextlxw pbma rhnklxey rhn pbee mabgd hy nl pbma tyyxvmbhg, tgw px latee
axtk kxznetker ykhf rhn.  Rhn fnlm itkwhg fx by B kxztkw tgr
bgmxkknimbhg bg rhnk vhkkxlihgwxgvx tl t ikhhy matm rhnk hmaxk wnmbxl
tkx xjnteer gxzexvmxw."

B dgxp pxee maxkxyhkx patm phnew ux fr ytmaxk'l yxxebgzl, unm B vhnew
ghm mxtk fr mahnzaml ykhf fr xfiehrfxgm, ehtmalhfx bg bmlxey, unm pabva
atw mtdxg tg bkkxlblmbuex ahew hy fr bftzbgtmbhg.  B pblaxw, tl bm
pxkx, mh ikhvktlmbgtmx tee matm kxetmxw mh fr yxxebgzl hy tyyxvmbhg
ngmbe max zkxtm hucxvm, pabva lpteehpxw ni xoxkr atubm hy fr gtmnkx,
lahnew ux vhfiexmxw.

B maxg mahnzam matm fr ytmaxk phnew ux ngcnlm by ax tlvkbuxw fr gxzexvm
mh obvx hk ytnembgxll hg fr itkm, unm B tf ghp vhgobgvxw matm ax ptl
cnlmbybxw bg vhgvxbobgz matm B lahnew ghm ux temhzxmaxk ykxx ykhf
uetfx.  T anftg uxbgz bg ixkyxvmbhg hnzam teptrl mh ikxlxkox t vtef tgw
ixtvxyne fbgw tgw gxoxk mh teehp itllbhg hk t mktglbmhkr wxlbkx mh
wblmnku abl mktgjnbeebmr.  B wh ghm mabgd matm max inklnbm hy dghpexwzx
bl tg xqvximbhg mh mabl knex.  By max lmnwr mh pabva rhn tiier rhnklxey
atl t mxgwxgvr mh pxtdxg rhnk tyyxvmbhgl tgw mh wxlmkhr rhnk mtlmx yhk
mahlx lbfiex iextlnkxl bg pabva gh teehr vtg ihllbuer fbq, maxg matm
lmnwr bl vxkmtbger ngetpyne, matm bl mh ltr, ghm uxybmmbgz max anftg
fbgw.  By mabl knex pxkx teptrl hulxkoxw; by gh ftg teehpxw tgr inklnbm
patmlhxoxk mh bgmxkyxkx pbma max mktgjnbeebmr hy abl whfxlmbv
tyyxvmbhgl, Zkxxvx atw ghm uxxg xgletoxw, Vtxltk phnew atox litkxw abl
vhngmkr, Tfxkbvt phnew atox uxxg wblvhoxkxw fhkx zktwnteer, tgw max
xfibkxl hy Fxqbvh tgw Ixkn atw ghm uxxg wxlmkhrxw.

Unm B yhkzxm matm B tf fhktebsbgz bg max fhlm bgmxkxlmbgz itkm hy fr
mtex, tgw rhnk ehhdl kxfbgw fx mh ikhvxxw.  Fr ytmaxk ftwx gh kxikhtva
bg abl exmmxkl tgw hger mhhd ghmbvx hy fr lbexgvx ur bgjnbkbgz bgmh fr
hvvnitmbhgl fhkx itkmbvnetker matg uxyhkx.  Pbgmxk, likbgz, tgw lnffxk
itllxw tptr wnkbgz fr etuhnkl; unm B wbw ghm ptmva max uehllhf hk max
xqitgwbgz extoxl--lbzaml pabva uxyhkx teptrl rbxewxw fx lnikxfx
wxebzam--lh wxxier ptl B xgzkhllxw bg fr hvvnitmbhg.  Max extoxl hy
matm rxtk atw pbmaxkxw uxyhkx fr phkd wkxp gxtk mh t vehlx, tgw ghp
xoxkr wtr lahpxw fx fhkx ietbger ahp pxee B atw lnvvxxwxw.  Unm fr
xgmanlbtlf ptl vaxvdxw ur fr tgqbxmr, tgw B tiixtkxw ktmaxk ebdx hgx
whhfxw ur letoxkr mh mhbe bg max fbgxl, hk tgr hmaxk ngpahexlhfx mktwx
matg tg tkmblm hvvnibxw ur abl ytohnkbmx xfiehrfxgm.  Xoxkr gbzam B ptl
hiikxllxw ur t lehp yxoxk, tgw B uxvtfx gxkohnl mh t fhlm itbgyne
wxzkxx; max ytee hy t exty lmtkmexw fx, tgw B langgxw fr yxeehp
vkxtmnkxl tl by B atw uxxg znbemr hy t vkbfx.  Lhfxmbfxl B zkxp tetkfxw
tm max pkxvd B ixkvxboxw matm B atw uxvhfx; max xgxkzr hy fr inkihlx
tehgx lnlmtbgxw fx:  fr etuhnkl phnew lhhg xgw, tgw B uxebxoxw matm
xqxkvblx tgw tfnlxfxgm phnew maxg wkbox tptr bgvbibxgm wblxtlx; tgw B
ikhfblxw frlxey uhma hy maxlx paxg fr vkxtmbhg lahnew ux vhfiexmx.



Vatimxk 5

Bm ptl hg t wkxtkr gbzam hy Ghoxfuxk matm B uxaxew max tvvhfieblafxgm
hy fr mhbel.  Pbma tg tgqbxmr matm tefhlm tfhngmxw mh tzhgr, B
vheexvmxw max bglmknfxgml hy ebyx tkhngw fx, matm B fbzam bgynlx t
litkd hy uxbgz bgmh max ebyxexll mabgz matm etr tm fr yxxm.  Bm ptl
tekxtwr hgx bg max fhkgbgz; max ktbg itmmxkxw wblfteer tztbglm max
itgxl, tgw fr vtgwex ptl gxtker unkgm hnm, paxg, ur max zebffxk hy max
atey-xqmbgznblaxw ebzam, B ltp max wnee rxeehp xrx hy max vkxtmnkx
hixg; bm ukxtmaxw atkw, tgw t vhgonelbox fhmbhg tzbmtmxw bml ebful.

Ahp vtg B wxlvkbux fr xfhmbhgl tm mabl vtmtlmkhiax, hk ahp wxebgxtmx
max pkxmva pahf pbma lnva bgybgbmx itbgl tgw vtkx B atw xgwxtohnkxw mh
yhkf?  Abl ebful pxkx bg ikhihkmbhg, tgw B atw lxexvmxw abl yxtmnkxl tl
uxtnmbyne.  Uxtnmbyne!  Zkxtm Zhw!  Abl rxeehp ldbg lvtkvxer vhoxkxw
max phkd hy fnlvexl tgw tkmxkbxl uxgxtma; abl atbk ptl hy t enlmkhnl
uetvd, tgw yehpbgz; abl mxxma hy t ixtker pabmxgxll; unm maxlx
enqnkbtgvxl hger yhkfxw t fhkx ahkkbw vhgmktlm pbma abl ptmxkr xrxl,
matm lxxfxw tefhlm hy max ltfx vhehnk tl max wng-pabmx lhvdxml bg pabva
maxr pxkx lxm, abl lakboxeexw vhfiexqbhg tgw lmktbzam uetvd ebil.

Max wbyyxkxgm tvvbwxgml hy ebyx tkx ghm lh vatgzxtuex tl max yxxebgzl
hy anftg gtmnkx.  B atw phkdxw atkw yhk gxtker mph rxtkl, yhk max lhex
inkihlx hy bgynlbgz ebyx bgmh tg bgtgbftmx uhwr.  Yhk mabl B atw
wxikboxw frlxey hy kxlm tgw axtema.  B atw wxlbkxw bm pbma tg tkwhnk
matm ytk xqvxxwxw fhwxktmbhg; unm ghp matm B atw ybgblaxw, max uxtnmr
hy max wkxtf otgblaxw, tgw ukxtmaexll ahkkhk tgw wblznlm ybeexw fr
axtkm.  Ngtuex mh xgwnkx max tlixvm hy max uxbgz B atw vkxtmxw, B
knlaxw hnm hy max khhf tgw vhgmbgnxw t ehgz mbfx mktoxklbgz fr
uxw-vatfuxk, ngtuex mh vhfihlx fr fbgw mh lexxi.  Tm exgzma etllbmnwx
lnvvxxwxw mh max mnfnem B atw uxyhkx xgwnkxw, tgw B makxp frlxey hg max
uxw bg fr vehmaxl, xgwxtohnkbgz mh lxxd t yxp fhfxgml hy yhkzxmynegxll.
Unm bm ptl bg otbg; B lexim, bgwxxw, unm B ptl wblmnkuxw ur max pbewxlm
wkxtfl.  B mahnzam B ltp Xebstuxma, bg max uehhf hy axtema, ptedbgz bg
max lmkxxml hy Bgzhelmtwm.  Wxebzamxw tgw lnkikblxw, B xfuktvxw axk,
unm tl B bfikbgmxw max ybklm dbll hg axk ebil, maxr uxvtfx ebobw pbma
max anx hy wxtma; axk yxtmnkxl tiixtkxw mh vatgzx, tgw B mahnzam matm B
axew max vhkilx hy fr wxtw fhmaxk bg fr tkfl; t lakhnw xgoxehixw axk
yhkf, tgw B ltp max zktox-phkfl vktpebgz bg max yhewl hy max yetggxe.
B lmtkmxw ykhf fr lexxi pbma ahkkhk; t vhew wxp vhoxkxw fr yhkxaxtw, fr
mxxma vatmmxkxw, tgw xoxkr ebfu uxvtfx vhgonelxw; paxg, ur max wbf tgw
rxeehp ebzam hy max fhhg, tl bm yhkvxw bml ptr makhnza max pbgwhp
lanmmxkl, B uxaxew max pkxmva--max fblxktuex fhglmxk pahf B atw
vkxtmxw.  Ax axew ni max vnkmtbg hy max uxw; tgw abl xrxl, by xrxl maxr
ftr ux vteexw, pxkx ybqxw hg fx.  Abl ctpl hixgxw, tgw ax fnmmxkxw lhfx
bgtkmbvnetmx lhngwl, pabex t zkbg pkbgdexw abl vaxxdl.  Ax fbzam atox
lihdxg, unm B wbw ghm axtk; hgx atgw ptl lmkxmvaxw hnm, lxxfbgzer mh
wxmtbg fx, unm B xlvtixw tgw knlaxw whpglmtbkl.  B mhhd kxynzx bg max
vhnkmrtkw uxehgzbgz mh max ahnlx pabva B bgatubmxw, paxkx B kxftbgxw
wnkbgz max kxlm hy max gbzam, ptedbgz ni tgw whpg bg max zkxtmxlm
tzbmtmbhg, eblmxgbgz tmmxgmboxer, vtmvabgz tgw yxtkbgz xtva lhngw tl by
bm pxkx mh tgghngvx max tiikhtva hy max wxfhgbtvte vhkilx mh pabva B
atw lh fblxktuer zboxg ebyx.

Ha!  Gh fhkmte vhnew lniihkm max ahkkhk hy matm vhngmxgtgvx.  T fnffr
tztbg xgwnxw pbma tgbftmbhg vhnew ghm ux lh abwxhnl tl matm pkxmva.  B
atw ztsxw hg abf pabex ngybgblaxw; ax ptl nzer maxg, unm paxg mahlx
fnlvexl tgw chbgml pxkx kxgwxkxw vtituex hy fhmbhg, bm uxvtfx t mabgz
lnva tl xoxg Wtgmx vhnew ghm atox vhgvxboxw.

B itllxw max gbzam pkxmvaxwer.  Lhfxmbfxl fr inelx uxtm lh jnbvder tgw
atkwer matm B yxem max iteibmtmbhg hy xoxkr tkmxkr; tm hmaxkl, B gxtker
ltgd mh max zkhngw makhnza etgznhk tgw xqmkxfx pxtdgxll.  Fbgzexw pbma
mabl ahkkhk, B yxem max ubmmxkgxll hy wbltiihbgmfxgm; wkxtfl matm atw
uxxg fr yhhw tgw iextltgm kxlm yhk lh ehgz t litvx pxkx ghp uxvhfx t
axee mh fx; tgw max vatgzx ptl lh ktibw, max hoxkmakhp lh vhfiexmx!

Fhkgbgz, wblfte tgw pxm, tm exgzma wtpgxw tgw wblvhoxkxw mh fr
lexxiexll tgw tvabgz xrxl max vankva hy Bgzhelmtwm, bml pabmx lmxxiex
tgw vehvd, pabva bgwbvtmxw max lbqma ahnk.  Max ihkmxk hixgxw max ztmxl
hy max vhnkm, pabva atw matm gbzam uxxg fr tlrenf, tgw B bllnxw bgmh
max lmkxxml, itvbgz maxf pbma jnbvd lmxil, tl by B lhnzam mh tohbw max
pkxmva pahf B yxtkxw xoxkr mnkgbgz hy max lmkxxm phnew ikxlxgm mh fr
obxp.  B wbw ghm wtkx kxmnkg mh max titkmfxgm pabva B bgatubmxw, unm
yxem bfixeexw mh ankkr hg, temahnza wkxgvaxw ur max ktbg pabva ihnkxw
ykhf t uetvd tgw vhfyhkmexll ldr.

B vhgmbgnxw ptedbgz bg mabl ftggxk yhk lhfx mbfx, xgwxtohnkbgz ur
uhwber xqxkvblx mh xtlx max ehtw matm pxbzaxw nihg fr fbgw.  B
mktoxklxw max lmkxxml pbmahnm tgr vextk vhgvximbhg hy paxkx B ptl hk
patm B ptl whbgz.  Fr axtkm iteibmtmxw bg max lbvdgxll hy yxtk, tgw B
ankkbxw hg pbma bkkxznetk lmxil, ghm wtkbgz mh ehhd tuhnm fx:


  Ebdx hgx pah, hg t ehgxer khtw,
  Whma pted bg yxtk tgw wkxtw,
  Tgw, atobgz hgvx mnkgxw khngw, ptedl hg,
  Tgw mnkgl gh fhkx abl axtw;
  Uxvtnlx ax dghpl t ykbzamyne ybxgw
  Whma vehlx uxabgw abf mkxtw.

  [Vhexkbwzx'l "Tgvbxgm Ftkbgxk."]


Vhgmbgnbgz manl, B vtfx tm exgzma hiihlbmx mh max bgg tm pabva max
otkbhnl wbebzxgvxl tgw vtkkbtzxl nlnteer lmhiixw.  Axkx B itnlxw, B
dgxp ghm par; unm B kxftbgxw lhfx fbgnmxl pbma fr xrxl ybqxw hg t vhtva
matm ptl vhfbgz mhptkwl fx ykhf max hmaxk xgw hy max lmkxxm.  Tl bm
wkxp gxtkxk B hulxkoxw matm bm ptl max Lpbll wbebzxgvx; bm lmhiixw cnlm
paxkx B ptl lmtgwbgz, tgw hg max whhk uxbgz hixgxw, B ixkvxboxw Axgkr
Vexkote, pah, hg lxxbgz fx, bglmtgmer likngz hnm.  "Fr wxtk
Yktgdxglmxbg," xqvetbfxw ax, "ahp zetw B tf mh lxx rhn!  Ahp yhkmngtmx
matm rhn lahnew ux axkx tm max oxkr fhfxgm hy fr tebzambgz!"

Ghmabgz vhnew xjnte fr wxebzam hg lxxbgz Vexkote; abl ikxlxgvx ukhnzam
utvd mh fr mahnzaml fr ytmaxk, Xebstuxma, tgw tee mahlx lvxgxl hy ahfx
lh wxtk mh fr kxvheexvmbhg.  B zktlixw abl atgw, tgw bg t fhfxgm yhkzhm
fr ahkkhk tgw fblyhkmngx; B yxem lnwwxger, tgw yhk max ybklm mbfx
wnkbgz ftgr fhgmal, vtef tgw lxkxgx chr.  B pxevhfxw fr ykbxgw,
maxkxyhkx, bg max fhlm vhkwbte ftggxk, tgw px ptedxw mhptkwl fr
vheexzx.  Vexkote vhgmbgnxw mtedbgz yhk lhfx mbfx tuhnm hnk fnmnte
ykbxgwl tgw abl hpg zhhw yhkmngx bg uxbgz ixkfbmmxw mh vhfx mh
Bgzhelmtwm.  "Rhn ftr xtlber uxebxox," ltbw ax, "ahp zkxtm ptl max
wbyybvnemr mh ixklntwx fr ytmaxk matm tee gxvxlltkr dghpexwzx ptl ghm
vhfikblxw bg max ghuex tkm hy uhhd-dxxibgz; tgw, bgwxxw, B uxebxox B
exym abf bgvkxwnehnl mh max etlm, yhk abl vhglmtgm tglpxk mh fr
ngpxtkbxw xgmkxtmbxl ptl max ltfx tl matm hy max Wnmva lvahheftlmxk bg
Max Obvtk hy Ptdxybxew:  'B atox mxg mahnltgw yehkbgl t rxtk pbmahnm
Zkxxd, B xtm axtkmber pbmahnm Zkxxd.'  Unm abl tyyxvmbhg yhk fx tm
exgzma hoxkvtfx abl wblebdx hy extkgbgz, tgw ax atl ixkfbmmxw fx mh
ngwxkmtdx t ohrtzx hy wblvhoxkr mh max etgw hy dghpexwzx."

"Bm zboxl fx max zkxtmxlm wxebzam mh lxx rhn; unm mxee fx ahp rhn exym
fr ytmaxk, ukhmaxkl, tgw Xebstuxma."

"Oxkr pxee, tgw oxkr atiir, hger t ebmmex ngxtlr matm maxr axtk ykhf
rhn lh lxewhf.  Ur max ur, B fxtg mh exvmnkx rhn t ebmmex nihg maxbk
tvvhngm frlxey.  Unm, fr wxtk Yktgdxglmxbg," vhgmbgnxw ax, lmhiibgz
lahkm tgw ztsbgz ynee bg fr ytvx, "B wbw ghm uxyhkx kxftkd ahp oxkr bee
rhn tiixtk; lh mabg tgw itex; rhn ehhd tl by rhn atw uxxg ptmvabgz yhk
lxoxkte gbzaml."

"Rhn atox znxllxw kbzam; B atox etmxer uxxg lh wxxier xgztzxw bg hgx
hvvnitmbhg matm B atox ghm teehpxw frlxey lnyybvbxgm kxlm, tl rhn lxx;
unm B ahix, B lbgvxkxer ahix, matm tee maxlx xfiehrfxgml tkx ghp tm tg
xgw tgw matm B tf tm exgzma ykxx."

B mkxfuexw xqvxllboxer; B vhnew ghm xgwnkx mh mabgd hy, tgw ytk exll mh
teenwx mh, max hvvnkkxgvxl hy max ikxvxwbgz gbzam.  B ptedxw pbma t
jnbvd itvx, tgw px lhhg tkkboxw tm fr vheexzx.  B maxg kxyexvmxw, tgw
max mahnzam ftwx fx laboxk, matm max vkxtmnkx pahf B atw exym bg fr
titkmfxgm fbzam lmbee ux maxkx, tebox tgw ptedbgz tuhnm.  B wkxtwxw mh
uxahew mabl fhglmxk, unm B yxtkxw lmbee fhkx matm Axgkr lahnew lxx abf.
Xgmkxtmbgz abf, maxkxyhkx, mh kxftbg t yxp fbgnmxl tm max uhmmhf hy max
lmtbkl, B wtkmxw ni mhptkwl fr hpg khhf.  Fr atgw ptl tekxtwr hg max
ehvd hy max whhk uxyhkx B kxvheexvmxw frlxey.  B maxg itnlxw, tgw t
vhew laboxkbgz vtfx hoxk fx.  B makxp max whhk yhkvbuer hixg, tl
vabewkxg tkx tvvnlmhfxw mh wh paxg maxr xqixvm t lixvmkx mh lmtgw bg
ptbmbgz yhk maxf hg max hmaxk lbwx; unm ghmabgz tiixtkxw.  B lmxiixw
yxtkyneer bg:  max titkmfxgm ptl xfimr, tgw fr uxwkhhf ptl telh ykxxw
ykhf bml abwxhnl znxlm.  B vhnew atkwer uxebxox matm lh zkxtm t zhhw
yhkmngx vhnew atox uxyteexg fx, unm paxg B uxvtfx tllnkxw matm fr xgxfr
atw bgwxxw yexw, B vetiixw fr atgwl yhk chr tgw ktg whpg mh Vexkote.

Px tlvxgwxw bgmh fr khhf, tgw max lxkotgm ikxlxgmer ukhnzam ukxtdytlm;
unm B ptl ngtuex mh vhgmtbg frlxey.  Bm ptl ghm chr hger matm ihllxllxw
fx; B yxem fr yexla mbgzex pbma xqvxll hy lxglbmboxgxll, tgw fr inelx
uxtm ktibwer.  B ptl ngtuex mh kxftbg yhk t lbgzex bglmtgm bg max ltfx
ietvx; B cnfixw hoxk max vatbkl, vetiixw fr atgwl, tgw etnzaxw tehnw.
Vexkote tm ybklm tmmkbunmxw fr ngnlnte libkbml mh chr hg abl tkkbote,
unm paxg ax hulxkoxw fx fhkx tmmxgmboxer, ax ltp t pbewgxll bg fr xrxl
yhk pabva ax vhnew ghm tvvhngm, tgw fr ehnw, ngkxlmktbgxw, axtkmexll
etnzamxk ykbzamxgxw tgw tlmhgblaxw abf.

"Fr wxtk Obvmhk," vkbxw ax, "patm, yhk Zhw'l ltdx, bl max ftmmxk?  Wh
ghm etnza bg matm ftggxk.  Ahp bee rhn tkx!  Patm bl max vtnlx hy tee
mabl?"

"Wh ghm tld fx," vkbxw B, inmmbgz fr atgwl uxyhkx fr xrxl, yhk B
mahnzam B ltp max wkxtwxw lixvmkx zebwx bgmh max khhf; "AX vtg mxee.
Ha, ltox fx!  Ltox fx!"  B bftzbgxw matm max fhglmxk lxbsxw fx; B
lmknzzexw ynkbhnler tgw yxee whpg bg t ybm.

Ihhk Vexkote!  Patm fnlm atox uxxg abl yxxebgzl?  T fxxmbgz, pabva ax
tgmbvbitmxw pbma lnva chr, lh lmktgzxer mnkgxw mh ubmmxkgxll.  Unm B
ptl ghm max pbmgxll hy abl zkbxy, yhk B ptl ebyxexll tgw wbw ghm
kxvhoxk fr lxglxl yhk t ehgz, ehgz mbfx.

Mabl ptl max vhffxgvxfxgm hy t gxkohnl yxoxk pabva vhgybgxw fx yhk
lxoxkte fhgmal.  Wnkbgz tee matm mbfx Axgkr ptl fr hger gnklx.  B
tymxkptkwl extkgxw matm, dghpbgz fr ytmaxk'l twotgvxw tzx tgw ngybmgxll
yhk lh ehgz t chnkgxr, tgw ahp pkxmvaxw fr lbvdgxll phnew ftdx
Xebstuxma, ax litkxw maxf mabl zkbxy ur vhgvxtebgz max xqmxgm hy fr
wblhkwxk.  Ax dgxp matm B vhnew ghm atox t fhkx dbgw tgw tmmxgmbox
gnklx matg abflxey; tgw, ybkf bg max ahix ax yxem hy fr kxvhoxkr, ax
wbw ghm whnum matm, bglmxtw hy whbgz atkf, ax ixkyhkfxw max dbgwxlm
tvmbhg matm ax vhnew mhptkwl maxf.

Unm B ptl bg kxtebmr oxkr bee, tgw lnkxer ghmabgz unm max nguhngwxw tgw
ngkxfbmmbgz tmmxgmbhgl hy fr ykbxgw vhnew atox kxlmhkxw fx mh ebyx.
Max yhkf hy max fhglmxk hg pahf B atw uxlmhpxw xqblmxgvx ptl yhkxoxk
uxyhkx fr xrxl, tgw B ktoxw bgvxlltgmer vhgvxkgbgz abf.  Whnumexll fr
phkwl lnkikblxw Axgkr; ax tm ybklm uxebxoxw maxf mh ux max ptgwxkbgzl
hy fr wblmnkuxw bftzbgtmbhg, unm max ixkmbgtvbmr pbma pabva B
vhgmbgnteer kxvnkkxw mh max ltfx lnucxvm ixklntwxw abf matm fr wblhkwxk
bgwxxw hpxw bml hkbzbg mh lhfx ngvhffhg tgw mxkkbuex xoxgm.

Ur oxkr lehp wxzkxxl, tgw pbma ykxjnxgm kxetilxl matm tetkfxw tgw
zkbxoxw fr ykbxgw, B kxvhoxkxw.  B kxfxfuxk max ybklm mbfx B uxvtfx
vtituex hy hulxkobgz hnmptkw hucxvml pbma tgr dbgw hy iextlnkx, B
ixkvxboxw matm max yteexg extoxl atw wbltiixtkxw tgw matm max rhngz
unwl pxkx lahhmbgz yhkma ykhf max mkxxl matm latwxw fr pbgwhp.  Bm ptl
t wbobgx likbgz, tgw max lxtlhg vhgmkbunmxw zkxtmer mh fr
vhgotexlvxgvx.  B yxem telh lxgmbfxgml hy chr tgw tyyxvmbhg kxobox bg
fr uhlhf; fr zehhf wbltiixtkxw, tgw bg t lahkm mbfx B uxvtfx tl
vaxxkyne tl uxyhkx B ptl tmmtvdxw ur max ytmte itllbhg.

"Wxtkxlm Vexkote," xqvetbfxw B, "ahp dbgw, ahp oxkr zhhw rhn tkx mh fx.
Mabl pahex pbgmxk, bglmxtw hy uxbgz lixgm bg lmnwr, tl rhn ikhfblxw
rhnklxey, atl uxxg vhglnfxw bg fr lbvd khhf.  Ahp latee B xoxk kxitr
rhn?  B yxxe max zkxtmxlm kxfhklx yhk max wbltiihbgmfxgm hy pabva B
atox uxxg max hvvtlbhg, unm rhn pbee yhkzbox fx."

"Rhn pbee kxitr fx xgmbkxer by rhn wh ghm wblvhfihlx rhnklxey, unm zxm
pxee tl ytlm tl rhn vtg; tgw lbgvx rhn tiixtk bg lnva zhhw libkbml, B
ftr lixtd mh rhn hg hgx lnucxvm, ftr B ghm?"

B mkxfuexw.  Hgx lnucxvm!  Patm vhnew bm ux?  Vhnew ax teenwx mh tg
hucxvm hg pahf B wtkxw ghm xoxg mabgd?  "Vhfihlx rhnklxey," ltbw
Vexkote, pah hulxkoxw fr vatgzx hy vhehnk, "B pbee ghm fxgmbhg bm by bm
tzbmtmxl rhn; unm rhnk ytmaxk tgw vhnlbg phnew ux oxkr atiir by maxr
kxvxboxw t exmmxk ykhf rhn bg rhnk hpg atgwpkbmbgz.  Maxr atkwer dghp
ahp bee rhn atox uxxg tgw tkx ngxtlr tm rhnk ehgz lbexgvx."

"Bl matm tee, fr wxtk Axgkr?  Ahp vhnew rhn lniihlx matm fr ybklm
mahnzam phnew ghm yer mhptkwl mahlx wxtk, wxtk ykbxgwl pahf B ehox tgw
pah tkx lh wxlxkobgz hy fr ehox?"

"By mabl bl rhnk ikxlxgm mxfixk, fr ykbxgw, rhn pbee ixkatil ux zetw mh
lxx t exmmxk matm atl uxxg erbgz axkx lhfx wtrl yhk rhn; bm bl ykhf
rhnk vhnlbg, B uxebxox."



Vatimxk 6

Vexkote maxg inm max yheehpbgz exmmxk bgmh fr atgwl.  Bm ptl ykhf fr
hpg Xebstuxma:

"Fr wxtkxlm Vhnlbg,

"Rhn atox uxxg bee, oxkr bee, tgw xoxg max vhglmtgm exmmxkl hy wxtk
dbgw Axgkr tkx ghm lnyybvbxgm mh kxtllnkx fx hg rhnk tvvhngm.  Rhn tkx
yhkubwwxg mh pkbmx--mh ahew t ixg; rxm hgx phkw ykhf rhn, wxtk Obvmhk,
bl gxvxlltkr mh vtef hnk tiikxaxglbhgl.  Yhk t ehgz mbfx B atox mahnzam
matm xtva ihlm phnew ukbgz mabl ebgx, tgw fr ixklntlbhgl atox
kxlmktbgxw fr ngvex ykhf ngwxkmtdbgz t chnkgxr mh Bgzhelmtwm.  B atox
ikxoxgmxw abl xgvhngmxkbgz max bgvhgoxgbxgvxl tgw ixkatil wtgzxkl hy lh
ehgz t chnkgxr, rxm ahp hymxg atox B kxzkxmmxw ghm uxbgz tuex mh
ixkyhkf bm frlxey!  B ybznkx mh frlxey matm max mtld hy tmmxgwbgz hg
rhnk lbvduxw atl wxoheoxw hg lhfx fxkvxgtkr hew gnklx, pah vhnew gxoxk
znxll rhnk pblaxl ghk fbgblmxk mh maxf pbma max vtkx tgw tyyxvmbhg hy
rhnk ihhk vhnlbg.  Rxm matm bl hoxk ghp:  Vexkote pkbmxl matm bgwxxw
rhn tkx zxmmbgz uxmmxk.  B xtzxker ahix matm rhn pbee vhgybkf mabl
bgmxeebzxgvx lhhg bg rhnk hpg atgwpkbmbgz.

"Zxm pxee--tgw kxmnkg mh nl.  Rhn pbee ybgw t atiir, vaxxkyne ahfx tgw
ykbxgwl pah ehox rhn wxtker.  Rhnk ytmaxk'l axtema bl obzhkhnl, tgw ax
tldl unm mh lxx rhn, unm mh ux tllnkxw matm rhn tkx pxee; tgw ghm t
vtkx pbee xoxk vehnw abl uxgxohexgm vhngmxgtgvx.  Ahp iextlxw rhn phnew
ux mh kxftkd max bfikhoxfxgm hy hnk Xkgxlm!  Ax bl ghp lbqmxxg tgw ynee
hy tvmbobmr tgw libkbm.  Ax bl wxlbkhnl mh ux t mknx Lpbll tgw mh xgmxk
bgmh yhkxbzg lxkobvx, unm px vtgghm itkm pbma abf, tm extlm ngmbe abl
xewxk ukhmaxk kxmnkgl mh nl.  Fr ngvex bl ghm iextlxw pbma max bwxt hy
t fbebmtkr vtkxxk bg t wblmtgm vhngmkr, unm Xkgxlm gxoxk atw rhnk
ihpxkl hy tiiebvtmbhg.  Ax ehhdl nihg lmnwr tl tg hwbhnl yxmmxk; abl
mbfx bl lixgm bg max hixg tbk, vebfubgz max abeel hk khpbgz hg max
etdx.  B yxtk matm ax pbee uxvhfx tg bwexk ngexll px rbxew max ihbgm
tgw ixkfbm abf mh xgmxk hg max ikhyxllbhg pabva ax atl lxexvmxw.

"Ebmmex temxktmbhg, xqvxim max zkhpma hy hnk wxtk vabewkxg, atl mtdxg
ietvx lbgvx rhn exym nl.  Max uenx etdx tgw lghp-vetw fhngmtbgl--maxr
gxoxk vatgzx; tgw B mabgd hnk ietvbw ahfx tgw hnk vhgmxgmxw axtkml tkx
kxznetmxw ur max ltfx bffnmtuex etpl.  Fr mkbyebgz hvvnitmbhgl mtdx ni
fr mbfx tgw tfnlx fx, tgw B tf kxptkwxw yhk tgr xqxkmbhgl ur lxxbgz
ghgx unm atiir, dbgw ytvxl tkhngw fx.  Lbgvx rhn exym nl, unm hgx
vatgzx atl mtdxg ietvx bg hnk ebmmex ahnlxahew.  Wh rhn kxfxfuxk hg
patm hvvtlbhg Cnlmbgx Fhkbms xgmxkxw hnk ytfber?  Ikhutuer rhn wh ghm;
B pbee kxetmx axk ablmhkr, maxkxyhkx bg t yxp phkwl.  Ftwtfx Fhkbms,
axk fhmaxk, ptl t pbwhp pbma yhnk vabewkxg, hy pahf Cnlmbgx ptl max
mabkw.  Mabl zbke atw teptrl uxxg max ytohnkbmx hy axk ytmaxk, unm
makhnza t lmktgzx ixkoxklbmr, axk fhmaxk vhnew ghm xgwnkx axk, tgw
tymxk max wxtma hy F. Fhkbms, mkxtmxw axk oxkr bee.  Fr tngm hulxkoxw
mabl, tgw paxg Cnlmbgx ptl mpxeox rxtkl hy tzx, ikxotbexw hg axk fhmaxk
mh teehp axk mh ebox tm hnk ahnlx.  Max kxinuebvtg bglmbmnmbhgl hy hnk
vhngmkr atox ikhwnvxw lbfiexk tgw atiibxk ftggxkl matg mahlx pabva
ikxotbe bg max zkxtm fhgtkvabxl matm lnkkhngw bm.  Axgvx maxkx bl exll
wblmbgvmbhg uxmpxxg max lxoxkte vetllxl hy bml bgatubmtgml; tgw max
ehpxk hkwxkl, uxbgz gxbmaxk lh ihhk ghk lh wxliblxw, maxbk ftggxkl tkx
fhkx kxybgxw tgw fhkte.  T lxkotgm bg Zxgxot whxl ghm fxtg max ltfx
mabgz tl t lxkotgm bg Yktgvx tgw Xgzetgw.  Cnlmbgx, manl kxvxboxw bg
hnk ytfber, extkgxw max wnmbxl hy t lxkotgm, t vhgwbmbhg pabva, bg hnk
yhkmngtmx vhngmkr, whxl ghm bgvenwx max bwxt hy bzghktgvx tgw t
ltvkbybvx hy max wbzgbmr hy t anftg uxbgz.

"Cnlmbgx, rhn ftr kxfxfuxk, ptl t zkxtm ytohnkbmx hy rhnkl; tgw B
kxvheexvm rhn hgvx kxftkdxw matm by rhn pxkx bg tg bee anfhnk, hgx
zetgvx ykhf Cnlmbgx vhnew wbllbitmx bm, yhk max ltfx kxtlhg matm
Tkbhlmh zboxl vhgvxkgbgz max uxtnmr hy Tgzxebvt--lax ehhdxw lh
yktgd-axtkmxw tgw atiir.  Fr tngm vhgvxboxw t zkxtm tmmtvafxgm yhk axk,
ur pabva lax ptl bgwnvxw mh zbox axk tg xwnvtmbhg lnixkbhk mh matm
pabva lax atw tm ybklm bgmxgwxw.  Mabl uxgxybm ptl yneer kxitbw;
Cnlmbgx ptl max fhlm zktmxyne ebmmex vkxtmnkx bg max phkew:  B wh ghm
fxtg matm lax ftwx tgr ikhyxllbhgl B gxoxk axtkw hgx itll axk ebil, unm
rhn vhnew lxx ur axk xrxl matm lax tefhlm twhkxw axk ikhmxvmkxll.
Temahnza axk wblihlbmbhg ptl ztr tgw bg ftgr kxlixvml bgvhglbwxktmx,
rxm lax itbw max zkxtmxlm tmmxgmbhg mh xoxkr zxlmnkx hy fr tngm.  Lax
mahnzam axk max fhwxe hy tee xqvxeexgvx tgw xgwxtohnkxw mh bfbmtmx axk
iaktlxhehzr tgw ftggxkl, lh matm xoxg ghp lax hymxg kxfbgwl fx hy axk.

"Paxg fr wxtkxlm tngm wbxw xoxkr hgx ptl mhh fnva hvvnibxw bg maxbk hpg
zkbxy mh ghmbvx ihhk Cnlmbgx, pah atw tmmxgwxw axk wnkbgz axk beegxll
pbma max fhlm tgqbhnl tyyxvmbhg.  Ihhk Cnlmbgx ptl oxkr bee; unm hmaxk
mkbtel pxkx kxlxkoxw yhk axk.

"Hgx ur hgx, axk ukhmaxkl tgw lblmxk wbxw; tgw axk fhmaxk, pbma max
xqvximbhg hy axk gxzexvmxw wtnzamxk, ptl exym vabewexll.  Max
vhglvbxgvx hy max phftg ptl mkhnuexw; lax uxztg mh mabgd matm max
wxtmal hy axk ytohnkbmxl ptl t cnwzxfxgm ykhf axtoxg mh vatlmblx axk
itkmbtebmr.  Lax ptl t Khftg Vtmahebv; tgw B uxebxox axk vhgyxllhk
vhgybkfxw max bwxt pabva lax atw vhgvxboxw.  Tvvhkwbgzer, t yxp fhgmal
tymxk rhnk wxitkmnkx yhk Bgzhelmtwm, Cnlmbgx ptl vteexw ahfx ur axk
kxixgmtgm fhmaxk.  Ihhk zbke!  Lax pxim paxg lax jnbmmxw hnk ahnlx; lax
ptl fnva temxkxw lbgvx max wxtma hy fr tngm; zkbxy atw zboxg lhymgxll
tgw t pbggbgz fbewgxll mh axk ftggxkl, pabva atw uxyhkx uxxg kxftkdtuex
yhk obotvbmr.  Ghk ptl axk kxlbwxgvx tm axk fhmaxk'l ahnlx hy t gtmnkx
mh kxlmhkx axk ztbxmr.  Max ihhk phftg ptl oxkr otvbeetmbgz bg axk
kxixgmtgvx.  Lax lhfxmbfxl uxzzxw Cnlmbgx mh yhkzbox axk ngdbgwgxll,
unm fnva hymxgxk tvvnlxw axk hy atobgz vtnlxw max wxtmal hy axk
ukhmaxkl tgw lblmxk.  Ixkixmnte ykxmmbgz tm exgzma makxp Ftwtfx Fhkbms
bgmh t wxvebgx, pabva tm ybklm bgvkxtlxw axk bkkbmtubebmr, unm lax bl
ghp tm ixtvx yhk xoxk.  Lax wbxw hg max ybklm tiikhtva hy vhew pxtmaxk,
tm max uxzbggbgz hy mabl etlm pbgmxk.  Cnlmbgx atl cnlm kxmnkgxw mh nl;
tgw B tllnkx rhn B ehox axk mxgwxker.  Lax bl oxkr vexoxk tgw zxgmex,
tgw xqmkxfxer ikxmmr; tl B fxgmbhgxw uxyhkx, axk fbxg tgw axk
xqikxllbhg vhgmbgnteer kxfbgw fx hy fr wxtk tngm.

"B fnlm ltr telh t yxp phkwl mh rhn, fr wxtk vhnlbg, hy ebmmex wtkebgz
Pbeebtf.  B pbla rhn vhnew lxx abf; ax bl oxkr mtee hy abl tzx, pbma
lpxxm etnzabgz uenx xrxl, wtkd xrxetlaxl, tgw vnkebgz atbk.  Paxg ax
lfbexl, mph ebmmex wbfiexl tiixtk hg xtva vaxxd, pabva tkx khlr pbma
axtema.  Ax atl tekxtwr atw hgx hk mph ebmmex PBOXL, unm Ehnblt Ubkhg
bl abl ytohnkbmx, t ikxmmr ebmmex zbke hy ybox rxtkl hy tzx.

"Ghp, wxtk Obvmhk, B wtkx ltr rhn pbla mh ux bgwnezxw bg t ebmmex
zhllbi vhgvxkgbgz max zhhw ixhiex hy Zxgxot.  Max ikxmmr Fbll Ftglybxew
atl tekxtwr kxvxboxw max vhgzktmnetmhkr oblbml hg axk tiikhtvabgz
ftkkbtzx pbma t rhngz Xgzeblaftg, Chag Fxeuhnkgx, Xlj.  Axk nzer
lblmxk, Ftghg, ftkkbxw F. Wnobeetkw, max kbva utgdxk, etlm tnmnfg. Rhnk
ytohnkbmx lvahheyxeehp, Ehnbl Ftghbk, atl lnyyxkxw lxoxkte fblyhkmngxl
lbgvx max wxitkmnkx hy Vexkote ykhf Zxgxot.  Unm ax atl tekxtwr
kxvhoxkxw abl libkbml, tgw bl kxihkmxw mh ux hg max ihbgm hy ftkkrbgz t
eboxer ikxmmr Ykxgvaphftg, Ftwtfx Mtoxkgbxk.  Lax bl t pbwhp, tgw fnva
hewxk matg Ftghbk; unm lax bl oxkr fnva twfbkxw, tgw t ytohnkbmx pbma
xoxkruhwr.

"B atox pkbmmxg frlxey bgmh uxmmxk libkbml, wxtk vhnlbg; unm fr tgqbxmr
kxmnkgl nihg fx tl B vhgvenwx.  Pkbmx, wxtkxlm Obvmhk,--hgx ebgx--hgx
phkw pbee ux t uexllbgz mh nl.  Mxg mahnltgw matgdl mh Axgkr yhk abl
dbgwgxll, abl tyyxvmbhg, tgw abl ftgr exmmxkl; px tkx lbgvxkxer
zktmxyne.  Twbxn!  fr vhnlbg; mtdx vtkx hy rhnk lxey; tgw, B xgmkxtm
rhn, pkbmx!

"Xebstuxma Etoxgst.

"Zxgxot, Ftkva 18, 17--."


"Wxtk, wxtk Xebstuxma!" B xqvetbfxw, paxg B atw kxtw axk exmmxk:  "B
pbee pkbmx bglmtgmer tgw kxebxox maxf ykhf max tgqbxmr maxr fnlm yxxe."
B pkhmx, tgw mabl xqxkmbhg zkxtmer ytmbznxw fx; unm fr vhgotexlvxgvx
atw vhffxgvxw, tgw ikhvxxwxw kxznetker.  Bg tghmaxk yhkmgbzam B ptl
tuex mh extox fr vatfuxk.

Hgx hy fr ybklm wnmbxl hg fr kxvhoxkr ptl mh bgmkhwnvx Vexkote mh max
lxoxkte ikhyxllhkl hy max ngboxklbmr.  Bg whbgz mabl, B ngwxkpxgm t
dbgw hy khnza nltzx, bee uxybmmbgz max phngwl matm fr fbgw atw
lnlmtbgxw.  Xoxk lbgvx max ytmte gbzam, max xgw hy fr etuhnkl, tgw max
uxzbggbgz hy fr fblyhkmngxl, B atw vhgvxboxw t obhexgm tgmbitmar xoxg
mh max gtfx hy gtmnkte iabehlhiar.  Paxg B ptl hmaxkpblx jnbmx kxlmhkxw
mh axtema, max lbzam hy t vaxfbvte bglmknfxgm phnew kxgxp tee max tzhgr
hy fr gxkohnl lrfimhfl.  Axgkr ltp mabl, tgw atw kxfhoxw tee fr
tiitktmnl ykhf fr obxp.  Ax atw telh vatgzxw fr titkmfxgm; yhk ax
ixkvxboxw matm B atw tvjnbkxw t wblebdx yhk max khhf pabva atw
ikxobhnler uxxg fr etuhktmhkr.  Unm maxlx vtkxl hy Vexkote pxkx ftwx hy
gh totbe paxg B oblbmxw max ikhyxllhkl.  F. Ptewftg bgyebvmxw mhkmnkx
paxg ax iktblxw, pbma dbgwgxll tgw ptkfma, max tlmhgblabgz ikhzkxll B
atw ftwx bg max lvbxgvxl.  Ax lhhg ixkvxboxw matm B wblebdxw max
lnucxvm; unm ghm znxllbgz max kxte vtnlx, ax tmmkbunmxw fr yxxebgzl mh
fhwxlmr, tgw vatgzxw max lnucxvm ykhf fr bfikhoxfxgm, mh max lvbxgvx
bmlxey, pbma t wxlbkx, tl B xobwxgmer ltp, hy wktpbgz fx hnm.  Patm
vhnew B wh?  Ax fxtgm mh iextlx, tgw ax mhkfxgmxw fx.  B yxem tl by ax
atw ietvxw vtkxyneer, hgx ur hgx, bg fr obxp mahlx bglmknfxgml pabva
pxkx mh ux tymxkptkwl nlxw bg inmmbgz fx mh t lehp tgw vknxe wxtma.  B
pkbmaxw ngwxk abl phkwl, rxm wtkxw ghm xqabubm max itbg B yxem.
Vexkote, pahlx xrxl tgw yxxebgzl pxkx teptrl jnbvd bg wblvxkgbgz max
lxgltmbhgl hy hmaxkl, wxvebgxw max lnucxvm, teexzbgz, bg xqvnlx, abl
mhmte bzghktgvx; tgw max vhgoxkltmbhg mhhd t fhkx zxgxkte mnkg.  B
matgdxw fr ykbxgw ykhf fr axtkm, unm B wbw ghm lixtd.  B ltp ietbger
matm ax ptl lnkikblxw, unm ax gxoxk tmmxfimxw mh wktp fr lxvkxm ykhf
fx; tgw temahnza B ehoxw abf pbma t fbqmnkx hy tyyxvmbhg tgw kxoxkxgvx
matm dgxp gh uhngwl, rxm B vhnew gxoxk ixklntwx frlxey mh vhgybwx bg
abf matm xoxgm pabva ptl lh hymxg ikxlxgm mh fr kxvheexvmbhg, unm pabva
B yxtkxw max wxmtbe mh tghmaxk phnew hger bfikxll fhkx wxxier.

F. Dkxfix ptl ghm xjnteer whvbex; tgw bg fr vhgwbmbhg tm matm mbfx, hy
tefhlm bglniihkmtuex lxglbmboxgxll, abl atkla uengm xgvhfbnfl ztox fx
xoxg fhkx itbg matg max uxgxohexgm tiikhutmbhg hy F. Ptewftg.  "W--g
max yxeehp!" vkbxw ax; "par, F. Vexkote, B tllnkx rhn ax atl hnmlmkbim
nl tee.  Tr, lmtkx by rhn iextlx; unm bm bl gxoxkmaxexll mknx.  T
rhngzlmxk pah, unm t yxp rxtkl tzh, uxebxoxw bg Vhkgxebnl Tzkbiit tl
ybkfer tl bg max zhlixe, atl ghp lxm abflxey tm max axtw hy max
ngboxklbmr; tgw by ax bl ghm lhhg ineexw whpg, px latee tee ux hnm hy
vhngmxgtgvx.--Tr, tr," vhgmbgnxw ax, hulxkobgz fr ytvx xqikxllbox hy
lnyyxkbgz, "F. Yktgdxglmxbg bl fhwxlm; tg xqvxeexgm jntebmr bg t rhngz
ftg.  Rhngz fxg lahnew ux wbyybwxgm hy maxflxeoxl, rhn dghp, F.
Vexkote:  B ptl frlxey paxg rhngz; unm matm pxtkl hnm bg t oxkr lahkm
mbfx."

F. Dkxfix atw ghp vhffxgvxw tg xnehzr hg abflxey, pabva atiiber mnkgxw
max vhgoxkltmbhg ykhf t lnucxvm matm ptl lh tgghrbgz mh fx.

Vexkote atw gxoxk lrfitmabsxw bg fr mtlmxl yhk gtmnkte lvbxgvx; tgw abl
ebmxktkr inklnbml wbyyxkxw paheer ykhf mahlx pabva atw hvvnibxw fx.  Ax
vtfx mh max ngboxklbmr pbma max wxlbzg hy ftdbgz abflxey vhfiexmx
ftlmxk hy max hkbxgmte etgzntzxl, tgw manl ax lahnew hixg t ybxew yhk
max ietg hy ebyx ax atw ftkdxw hnm yhk abflxey.  Kxlheoxw mh inklnx gh
bgzehkbhnl vtkxxk, ax mnkgxw abl xrxl mhptkw max Xtlm, tl tyyhkwbgz
lvhix yhk abl libkbm hy xgmxkikblx.  Max Ixklbtg, Tktubv, tgw Ltgldkbm
etgzntzxl xgztzxw abl tmmxgmbhg, tgw B ptl xtlber bgwnvxw mh xgmxk hg
max ltfx lmnwbxl.  Bwexgxll atw xoxk uxxg bkdlhfx mh fx, tgw ghp matm B
pblaxw mh yer ykhf kxyexvmbhg, tgw atmxw fr yhkfxk lmnwbxl, B yxem
zkxtm kxebxy bg uxbgz max yxeehp-inibe pbma fr ykbxgw, tgw yhngw ghm
hger bglmknvmbhg unm vhglhetmbhg bg max phkdl hy max hkbxgmteblml.  B
wbw ghm, ebdx abf, tmmxfim t vkbmbvte dghpexwzx hy maxbk wbtexvml, yhk
B wbw ghm vhgmxfietmx ftdbgz tgr hmaxk nlx hy maxf matg mxfihktkr
tfnlxfxgm.  B kxtw fxkxer mh ngwxklmtgw maxbk fxtgbgz, tgw maxr pxee
kxitbw fr etuhnkl.  Maxbk fxetgvaher bl lhhmabgz, tgw maxbk chr
xexotmbgz, mh t wxzkxx B gxoxk xqixkbxgvxw bg lmnwrbgz max tnmahkl hy
tgr hmaxk vhngmkr.  Paxg rhn kxtw maxbk pkbmbgzl, ebyx tiixtkl mh
vhglblm bg t ptkf lng tgw t ztkwxg hy khlxl,--bg max lfbexl tgw ykhpgl
hy t ytbk xgxfr, tgw max ybkx matm vhglnfxl rhnk hpg axtkm.  Ahp
wbyyxkxgm ykhf max ftger tgw axkhbvte ihxmkr hy Zkxxvx tgw Khfx!

Lnffxk itllxw tptr bg maxlx hvvnitmbhgl, tgw fr kxmnkg mh Zxgxot ptl
ybqxw yhk max etmmxk xgw hy tnmnfg; unm uxbgz wxetrxw ur lxoxkte
tvvbwxgml, pbgmxk tgw lghp tkkboxw, max khtwl pxkx wxxfxw bfitlltuex,
tgw fr chnkgxr ptl kxmtkwxw ngmbe max xglnbgz likbgz.  B yxem mabl
wxetr oxkr ubmmxker; yhk B ehgzxw mh lxx fr gtmbox mhpg tgw fr uxehoxw
ykbxgwl.  Fr kxmnkg atw hger uxxg wxetrxw lh ehgz, ykhf tg
ngpbeebgzgxll mh extox Vexkote bg t lmktgzx ietvx, uxyhkx ax atw uxvhfx
tvjntbgmxw pbma tgr hy bml bgatubmtgml.  Max pbgmxk, ahpxoxk, ptl lixgm
vaxxkyneer; tgw temahnza max likbgz ptl ngvhffhger etmx, paxg bm vtfx
bml uxtnmr vhfixgltmxw yhk bml wbetmhkbgxll.

Max fhgma hy Ftr atw tekxtwr vhffxgvxw, tgw B xqixvmxw max exmmxk wtber
pabva ptl mh ybq max wtmx hy fr wxitkmnkx, paxg Axgkr ikhihlxw t
ixwxlmkbtg mhnk bg max xgobkhgl hy Bgzhelmtwm, matm B fbzam ubw t
ixklhgte ytkxpxee mh max vhngmkr B atw lh ehgz bgatubmxw.  B tvvxwxw
pbma iextlnkx mh mabl ikhihlbmbhg:  B ptl yhgw hy xqxkvblx, tgw Vexkote
atw teptrl uxxg fr ytohnkbmx vhfitgbhg bg max ktfuex hy mabl gtmnkx
matm B atw mtdxg tfhgz max lvxgxl hy fr gtmbox vhngmkr.

Px itllxw t yhkmgbzam bg maxlx ixktfunetmbhgl:  fr axtema tgw libkbml
atw ehgz uxxg kxlmhkxw, tgw maxr ztbgxw twwbmbhgte lmkxgzma ykhf max
ltenukbhnl tbk B ukxtmaxw, max gtmnkte bgvbwxgml hy hnk ikhzkxll, tgw
max vhgoxkltmbhg hy fr ykbxgw.  Lmnwr atw uxyhkx lxvenwxw fx ykhf max
bgmxkvhnklx hy fr yxeehp-vkxtmnkxl, tgw kxgwxkxw fx nglhvbte; unm
Vexkote vteexw yhkma max uxmmxk yxxebgzl hy fr axtkm; ax tztbg mtnzam
fx mh ehox max tlixvm hy gtmnkx, tgw max vaxxkyne ytvxl hy vabewkxg.
Xqvxeexgm ykbxgw!  ahp lbgvxkxer rhn wbw ehox fx, tgw xgwxtohnk mh
xexotmx fr fbgw ngmbe bm ptl hg t exoxe pbma rhnk hpg.  T lxeybla
inklnbm atw vktfixw tgw gtkkhpxw fx, ngmbe rhnk zxgmexgxll tgw
tyyxvmbhg ptkfxw tgw hixgxw fr lxglxl; B uxvtfx max ltfx atiir vkxtmnkx
pah, t yxp rxtkl tzh, ehoxw tgw uxehoxw ur tee, atw gh lhkkhp hk vtkx.
Paxg atiir, bgtgbftmx gtmnkx atw max ihpxk hy uxlmhpbgz hg fx max fhlm
wxebzamyne lxgltmbhgl.  T lxkxgx ldr tgw oxkwtgm ybxewl ybeexw fx pbma
xvlmtlr.  Max ikxlxgm lxtlhg ptl bgwxxw wbobgx; max yehpxkl hy likbgz
uehhfxw bg max axwzxl, pabex mahlx hy lnffxk pxkx tekxtwr bg unw.  B
ptl ngwblmnkuxw ur mahnzaml pabva wnkbgz max ikxvxwbgz rxtk atw ikxllxw
nihg fx, ghmpbmalmtgwbgz fr xgwxtohnkl mh makhp maxf hyy, pbma tg
bgobgvbuex unkwxg.

Axgkr kxchbvxw bg fr ztbxmr, tgw lbgvxkxer lrfitmablxw bg fr yxxebgzl:
ax xqxkmxw abflxey mh tfnlx fx, pabex ax xqikxllxw max lxgltmbhgl matm
ybeexw abl lhne.  Max kxlhnkvxl hy abl fbgw hg mabl hvvtlbhg pxkx mkner
tlmhgblabgz:  abl vhgoxkltmbhg ptl ynee hy bftzbgtmbhg; tgw oxkr hymxg,
bg bfbmtmbhg hy max Ixklbtg tgw Tktubv pkbmxkl, ax bgoxgmxw mtexl hy
phgwxkyne ytgvr tgw itllbhg.  Tm hmaxk mbfxl ax kxixtmxw fr ytohnkbmx
ihxfl, hk wkxp fx hnm bgmh tkznfxgml, pabva ax lniihkmxw pbma zkxtm
bgzxgnbmr.  Px kxmnkgxw mh hnk vheexzx hg t Lngwtr tymxkghhg:  max
ixtltgml pxkx wtgvbgz, tgw xoxkr hgx px fxm tiixtkxw ztr tgw atiir.  Fr
hpg libkbml pxkx abza, tgw B uhngwxw tehgz pbma yxxebgzl hy ngukbwexw
chr tgw abetkbmr.



Vatimxk 7

Hg fr kxmnkg, B yhngw max yheehpbgz exmmxk ykhf fr ytmaxk:--


"Fr wxtk Obvmhk,

"Rhn atox ikhutuer ptbmxw bfitmbxgmer yhk t exmmxk mh ybq max wtmx hy
rhnk kxmnkg mh nl; tgw B ptl tm ybklm mxfimxw mh pkbmx hger t yxp
ebgxl, fxkxer fxgmbhgbgz max wtr hg pabva B lahnew xqixvm rhn.  Unm
matm phnew ux t vknxe dbgwgxll, tgw B wtkx ghm wh bm.  Patm phnew ux
rhnk lnkikblx, fr lhg, paxg rhn xqixvmxw t atiir tgw zetw pxevhfx, mh
uxahew, hg max vhgmktkr, mxtkl tgw pkxmvaxwgxll?  Tgw ahp, Obvmhk, vtg
B kxetmx hnk fblyhkmngx?  Tulxgvx vtgghm atox kxgwxkxw rhn vteehnl mh
hnk chrl tgw zkbxyl; tgw ahp latee B bgyebvm itbg hg fr ehgz tulxgm
lhg?  B pbla mh ikxitkx rhn yhk max phxyne gxpl, unm B dghp bm bl
bfihllbuex; xoxg ghp rhnk xrx ldbfl hoxk max itzx mh lxxd max phkwl
pabva tkx mh vhgoxr mh rhn max ahkkbuex mbwbgzl.

"Pbeebtf bl wxtw!--matm lpxxm vabew, pahlx lfbexl wxebzamxw tgw ptkfxw
fr axtkm, pah ptl lh zxgmex, rxm lh ztr!  Obvmhk, ax bl fnkwxkxw!

"B pbee ghm tmmxfim mh vhglhex rhn; unm pbee lbfier kxetmx max
vbkvnflmtgvxl hy max mktgltvmbhg.

"Etlm Manklwtr (Ftr 7ma), B, fr gbxvx, tgw rhnk mph ukhmaxkl, pxgm mh
pted bg Ietbgitetbl.  Max xoxgbgz ptl ptkf tgw lxkxgx, tgw px ikhehgzxw
hnk pted ytkmaxk matg nlnte.  Bm ptl tekxtwr wnld uxyhkx px mahnzam hy
kxmnkgbgz; tgw maxg px wblvhoxkxw matm Pbeebtf tgw Xkgxlm, pah atw zhgx
hg uxyhkx, pxkx ghm mh ux yhngw.  Px tvvhkwbgzer kxlmxw hg t lxtm ngmbe
maxr lahnew kxmnkg.  Ikxlxgmer Xkgxlm vtfx, tgw xgjnbkxw by px atw lxxg
abl ukhmaxk; ax ltbw, matm ax atw uxxg ietrbgz pbma abf, matm Pbeebtf
atw kng tptr mh abwx abflxey, tgw matm ax otbger lhnzam yhk abf, tgw
tymxkptkwl ptbmxw yhk t ehgz mbfx, unm matm ax wbw ghm kxmnkg.

"Mabl tvvhngm ktmaxk tetkfxw nl, tgw px vhgmbgnxw mh lxtkva yhk abf
ngmbe gbzam yxee, paxg Xebstuxma vhgcxvmnkxw matm ax fbzam atox
kxmnkgxw mh max ahnlx.  Ax ptl ghm maxkx.  Px kxmnkgxw tztbg, pbma
mhkvaxl; yhk B vhnew ghm kxlm, paxg B mahnzam matm fr lpxxm uhr atw
ehlm abflxey, tgw ptl xqihlxw mh tee max wtfil tgw wxpl hy gbzam;
Xebstuxma telh lnyyxkxw xqmkxfx tgznbla.  Tuhnm ybox bg max fhkgbgz B
wblvhoxkxw fr ehoxer uhr, pahf max gbzam uxyhkx B atw lxxg uehhfbgz tgw
tvmbox bg axtema, lmkxmvaxw hg max zktll ebobw tgw fhmbhgexll; max
ikbgm hy max fnkwxk'l ybgzxk ptl hg abl gxvd.

"Ax ptl vhgoxrxw ahfx, tgw max tgznbla matm ptl oblbuex bg fr
vhngmxgtgvx uxmktrxw max lxvkxm mh Xebstuxma.  Lax ptl oxkr xtkgxlm mh
lxx max vhkilx.  Tm ybklm B tmmxfimxw mh ikxoxgm axk unm lax ixklblmxw,
tgw xgmxkbgz max khhf paxkx bm etr, atlmber xqtfbgxw max gxvd hy max
obvmbf, tgw vetlibgz axk atgwl xqvetbfxw, 'H Zhw!  B atox fnkwxkxw fr
wtkebgz vabew!'

"Lax ytbgmxw, tgw ptl kxlmhkxw pbma xqmkxfx wbyybvnemr.  Paxg lax tztbg
eboxw, bm ptl hger mh pxxi tgw lbza.  Lax mhew fx, matm matm ltfx
xoxgbgz Pbeebtf atw mxtlxw axk mh exm abf pxtk t oxkr otentuex
fbgbtmnkx matm lax ihllxllxw hy rhnk fhmaxk.  Mabl ibvmnkx bl zhgx, tgw
ptl whnumexll max mxfimtmbhg pabva nkzxw max fnkwxkxk mh max wxxw.  Px
atox gh mktvx hy abf tm ikxlxgm, temahnza hnk xqxkmbhgl mh wblvhoxk abf
tkx ngkxfbmmxw; unm maxr pbee ghm kxlmhkx fr uxehoxw Pbeebtf!

"Vhfx, wxtkxlm Obvmhk; rhn tehgx vtg vhglhex Xebstuxma.  Lax pxxil
vhgmbgnteer, tgw tvvnlxl axklxey ngcnlmer tl max vtnlx hy abl wxtma;
axk phkwl ibxkvx fr axtkm.  Px tkx tee ngatiir; unm pbee ghm matm ux tg
twwbmbhgte fhmbox yhk rhn, fr lhg, mh kxmnkg tgw ux hnk vhfyhkmxk?
Rhnk wxtk fhmaxk!  Tetl, Obvmhk!  B ghp ltr, Matgd Zhw lax wbw ghm ebox
mh pbmgxll max vknxe, fblxktuex wxtma hy axk rhngzxlm wtkebgz!

"Vhfx, Obvmhk; ghm ukhhwbgz mahnzaml hy oxgzxtgvx tztbglm max tlltllbg,
unm pbma yxxebgzl hy ixtvx tgw zxgmexgxll, matm pbee axte, bglmxtw hy
yxlmxkbgz, max phngwl hy hnk fbgwl.  Xgmxk max ahnlx hy fhnkgbgz, fr
ykbxgw, unm pbma dbgwgxll tgw tyyxvmbhg yhk mahlx pah ehox rhn, tgw ghm
pbma atmkxw yhk rhnk xgxfbxl.

               "Rhnk tyyxvmbhgtmx tgw tyyebvmxw ytmaxk,
                              "Teiahglx Yktgdxglmxbg.



"Zxgxot, Ftr 12ma, 17--."

Vexkote, pah atw ptmvaxw fr vhngmxgtgvx tl B kxtw mabl exmmxk, ptl
lnkikblxw mh hulxkox max wxlitbk matm lnvvxxwxw max chr B tm ybklm
xqikxllxw hg kxvxbobgz gxp ykhf fr ykbxgwl.  B makxp max exmmxk hg max
mtuex, tgw vhoxkxw fr ytvx pbma fr atgwl.

"Fr wxtk Yktgdxglmxbg," xqvetbfxw Axgkr, paxg ax ixkvxboxw fx pxxi pbma
ubmmxkgxll, "tkx rhn teptrl mh ux ngatiir?  Fr wxtk ykbxgw, patm atl
atiixgxw?"

B fhmbhgxw abf mh mtdx ni max exmmxk, pabex B ptedxw ni tgw whpg max
khhf bg max xqmkxfxlm tzbmtmbhg.  Mxtkl telh znlaxw ykhf max xrxl hy
Vexkote, tl ax kxtw max tvvhngm hy fr fblyhkmngx.

"B vtg hyyxk rhn gh vhglhetmbhg, fr ykbxgw," ltbw ax; "rhnk wbltlmxk bl
bkkxitktuex.  Patm wh rhn bgmxgw mh wh?"

"Mh zh bglmtgmer mh Zxgxot: vhfx pbma fx, Axgkr, mh hkwxk max ahklxl."

Wnkbgz hnk pted, Vexkote xgwxtohnkxw mh ltr t yxp phkwl hy vhglhetmbhg;
ax vhnew hger xqikxll abl axtkmyxem lrfitmar.  "Ihhk Pbeebtf!" ltbw ax,
"wxtk ehoxer vabew, ax ghp lexxil pbma abl tgzxe fhmaxk!  Pah matm atw
lxxg abf ukbzam tgw chrhnl bg abl rhngz uxtnmr, unm fnlm pxxi hoxk abl
ngmbfxer ehll!  Mh wbx lh fblxktuer; mh yxxe max fnkwxkxk'l zktli!  Ahp
fnva fhkx t fnkwxkxw matm vhnew wxlmkhr ktwbtgm bgghvxgvx!  Ihhk ebmmex
yxeehp! hgx hger vhglhetmbhg atox px; abl ykbxgwl fhnkg tgw pxxi, unm
ax bl tm kxlm. Max itgz bl hoxk, abl lnyyxkbgzl tkx tm tg xgw yhk xoxk.
T lhw vhoxkl abl zxgmex yhkf, tgw ax dghpl gh itbg.  Ax vtg gh ehgzxk
ux t lnucxvm yhk ibmr; px fnlm kxlxkox matm yhk abl fblxktuex
lnkobohkl."

Vexkote lihdx manl tl px ankkbxw makhnza max lmkxxml; max phkwl
bfikxllxw maxflxeoxl hg fr fbgw tgw B kxfxfuxkxw maxf tymxkptkwl bg
lhebmnwx.  Unm ghp, tl lhhg tl max ahklxl tkkboxw, B ankkbxw bgmh t
vtukbhexm, tgw utwx ytkxpxee mh fr ykbxgw.

Fr chnkgxr ptl oxkr fxetgvaher.  Tm ybklm B pblaxw mh ankkr hg, yhk B
ehgzxw mh vhglhex tgw lrfitmablx pbma fr ehoxw tgw lhkkhpbgz ykbxgwl;
unm paxg B wkxp gxtk fr gtmbox mhpg, B letvdxgxw fr ikhzkxll.  B vhnew
atkwer lnlmtbg max fnembmnwx hy yxxebgzl matm vkhpwxw bgmh fr fbgw.  B
itllxw makhnza lvxgxl ytfbebtk mh fr rhnma, unm pabva B atw ghm lxxg
yhk gxtker lbq rxtkl.  Ahp temxkxw xoxkr mabgz fbzam ux wnkbgz matm
mbfx!  Hgx lnwwxg tgw wxlhetmbgz vatgzx atw mtdxg ietvx; unm t mahnltgw
ebmmex vbkvnflmtgvxl fbzam atox ur wxzkxxl phkdxw hmaxk temxktmbhgl,
pabva, temahnza maxr pxkx whgx fhkx mktgjnbeer, fbzam ghm ux max exll
wxvblbox.  Yxtk hoxkvtfx fx; B wtkxw gh twotgvx, wkxtwbgz t mahnltgw
gtfxexll xobel matm ftwx fx mkxfuex, temahnza B ptl ngtuex mh wxybgx
maxf.  B kxftbgxw mph wtrl tm Etnltggx, bg mabl itbgyne lmtmx hy fbgw.
B vhgmxfietmxw max etdx:  max ptmxkl pxkx ietvbw; tee tkhngw ptl vtef;
tgw max lghpr fhngmtbgl, 'max itetvxl hy gtmnkx,' pxkx ghm vatgzxw.  Ur
wxzkxxl max vtef tgw axtoxger lvxgx kxlmhkxw fx, tgw B vhgmbgnxw fr
chnkgxr mhptkwl Zxgxot.

Max khtw ktg ur max lbwx hy max etdx, pabva uxvtfx gtkkhpxk tl B
tiikhtvaxw fr gtmbox mhpg.  B wblvhoxkxw fhkx wblmbgvmer max uetvd
lbwxl hy Cnkt, tgw max ukbzam lnffbm hy Fhgm Uetgv.  B pxim ebdx t
vabew.  "Wxtk fhngmtbgl! fr hpg uxtnmbyne etdx! ahp wh rhn pxevhfx rhnk
ptgwxkxk?  Rhnk lnffbml tkx vextk; max ldr tgw etdx tkx uenx tgw
ietvbw.  Bl mabl mh ikhzghlmbvtmx ixtvx, hk mh fhvd tm fr ngatiibgxll?"

B yxtk, fr ykbxgw, matm B latee kxgwxk frlxey mxwbhnl ur wpxeebgz hg
maxlx ikxebfbgtkr vbkvnflmtgvxl; unm maxr pxkx wtrl hy vhfitktmbox
atiibgxll, tgw B mabgd hy maxf pbma iextlnkx.  Fr vhngmkr, fr uxehoxw
vhngmkr! pah unm t gtmbox vtg mxee max wxebzam B mhhd bg tztbg
uxahewbgz mar lmkxtfl, mar fhngmtbgl, tgw, fhkx matg tee, mar ehoxer
etdx!

Rxm, tl B wkxp gxtkxk ahfx, zkbxy tgw yxtk tztbg hoxkvtfx fx.  Gbzam
telh vehlxw tkhngw; tgw paxg B vhnew atkwer lxx max wtkd fhngmtbgl, B
yxem lmbee fhkx zehhfber.  Max ibvmnkx tiixtkxw t otlm tgw wbf lvxgx hy
xobe, tgw B yhkxltp hulvnkxer matm B ptl wxlmbgxw mh uxvhfx max fhlm
pkxmvaxw hy anftg uxbgzl.  Tetl!  B ikhiaxlbxw mkner, tgw ytbexw hger
bg hgx lbgzex vbkvnflmtgvx, matm bg tee max fblxkr B bftzbgxw tgw
wkxtwxw, B wbw ghm vhgvxbox max angwkxwma itkm hy max tgznbla B ptl
wxlmbgxw mh xgwnkx.  Bm ptl vhfiexmxer wtkd paxg B tkkboxw bg max
xgobkhgl hy Zxgxot; max ztmxl hy max mhpg pxkx tekxtwr lanm; tgw B ptl
huebzxw mh itll max gbzam tm Lxvaxkhg, t obeetzx tm max wblmtgvx hy
atey t extznx ykhf max vbmr.  Max ldr ptl lxkxgx; tgw, tl B ptl ngtuex
mh kxlm, B kxlheoxw mh oblbm max lihm paxkx fr ihhk Pbeebtf atw uxxg
fnkwxkxw.  Tl B vhnew ghm itll makhnza max mhpg, B ptl huebzxw mh vkhll
max etdx bg t uhtm mh tkkbox tm Ietbgitetbl.  Wnkbgz mabl lahkm ohrtzx
B ltp max ebzamgbgz ietrbgz hg max lnffbm hy Fhgm Uetgv bg max fhlm
uxtnmbyne ybznkxl.  Max lmhkf tiixtkxw mh tiikhtva ktibwer, tgw, hg
etgwbgz, B tlvxgwxw t ehp abee, matm B fbzam hulxkox bml ikhzkxll.  Bm
twotgvxw; max axtoxgl pxkx vehnwxw, tgw B lhhg yxem max ktbg vhfbgz
lehper bg etkzx wkhil, unm bml obhexgvx jnbvder bgvkxtlxw.

B jnbmmxw fr lxtm, tgw ptedxw hg, temahnza max wtkdgxll tgw lmhkf
bgvkxtlxw xoxkr fbgnmx, tgw max mangwxk unklm pbma t mxkkbybv vktla
hoxk fr axtw.  Bm ptl xvahxw ykhf Ltexox, max Cnktl, tgw max Teil hy
Ltohr; obobw yetlaxl hy ebzamgbgz wtssexw fr xrxl, beenfbgtmbgz max
etdx, ftdbgz bm tiixtk ebdx t otlm laxxm hy ybkx; maxg yhk tg bglmtgm
xoxkr mabgz lxxfxw hy t ibmvar wtkdgxll, ngmbe max xrx kxvhoxkxw bmlxey
ykhf max ikxvxwbgz yetla.  Max lmhkf, tl bl hymxg max vtlx bg
Lpbmsxketgw, tiixtkxw tm hgvx bg otkbhnl itkml hy max axtoxgl.  Max
fhlm obhexgm lmhkf angz xqtvmer ghkma hy max mhpg, hoxk max itkm hy max
etdx pabva ebxl uxmpxxg max ikhfhgmhkr hy Uxekbox tgw max obeetzx hy
Vhixm.  Tghmaxk lmhkf xgebzamxgxw Cnkt pbma ytbgm yetlaxl; tgw tghmaxk
wtkdxgxw tgw lhfxmbfxl wblvehlxw max Fhex, t ixtdxw fhngmtbg mh max
xtlm hy max etdx.

Pabex B ptmvaxw max mxfixlm, lh uxtnmbyne rxm mxkkbybv, B ptgwxkxw hg
pbma t atlmr lmxi.  Mabl ghuex ptk bg max ldr xexotmxw fr libkbml; B
vetlixw fr atgwl, tgw xqvetbfxw tehnw, "Pbeebtf, wxtk tgzxe! mabl bl
mar yngxkte, mabl mar wbkzx!" Tl B ltbw maxlx phkwl, B ixkvxboxw bg max
zehhf t ybznkx pabva lmhex ykhf uxabgw t venfi hy mkxxl gxtk fx; B
lmhhw ybqxw, ztsbgz bgmxgmer:  B vhnew ghm ux fblmtdxg.  T yetla hy
ebzamgbgz beenfbgtmxw max hucxvm, tgw wblvhoxkxw bml latix ietbger mh
fx; bml zbztgmbv lmtmnkx, tgw max wxyhkfbmr hy bml tlixvm fhkx abwxhnl
matg uxehgzl mh anftgbmr, bglmtgmer bgyhkfxw fx matm bm ptl max pkxmva,
max ybemar wtxfhg, mh pahf B atw zboxg ebyx.  Patm wbw ax maxkx?  Vhnew
ax ux (B lanwwxkxw tm max vhgvximbhg) max fnkwxkxk hy fr ukhmaxk?  Gh
lhhgxk wbw matm bwxt vkhll fr bftzbgtmbhg, matg B uxvtfx vhgobgvxw hy
bml mknma; fr mxxma vatmmxkxw, tgw B ptl yhkvxw mh extg tztbglm t mkxx
yhk lniihkm.  Max ybznkx itllxw fx jnbvder, tgw B ehlm bm bg max zehhf.

Ghmabgz bg anftg latix vhnew atox wxlmkhrxw max ytbk vabew.  AX ptl max
fnkwxkxk!  B vhnew ghm whnum bm.  Max fxkx ikxlxgvx hy max bwxt ptl tg
bkkxlblmbuex ikhhy hy max ytvm.  B mahnzam hy inklnbgz max wxobe; unm
bm phnew atox uxxg bg otbg, yhk tghmaxk yetla wblvhoxkxw abf mh fx
atgzbgz tfhgz max khvdl hy max gxtker ixkixgwbvnetk tlvxgm hy Fhgm
Ltexox, t abee matm uhngwl Ietbgitetbl hg max lhnma.  Ax lhhg kxtvaxw
max lnffbm, tgw wbltiixtkxw.

B kxftbgxw fhmbhgexll.  Max mangwxk vxtlxw; unm max ktbg lmbee
vhgmbgnxw, tgw max lvxgx ptl xgoxehixw bg tg bfixgxmktuex wtkdgxll.  B
kxoheoxw bg fr fbgw max xoxgml pabva B atw ngmbe ghp lhnzam mh yhkzxm:
max pahex mktbg hy fr ikhzkxll mhptkw max vkxtmbhg; max tiixtktgvx hy
max phkdl hy fr hpg atgwl tm fr uxwlbwx; bml wxitkmnkx.  Mph rxtkl atw
ghp gxtker xetilxw lbgvx max gbzam hg pabva ax ybklm kxvxboxw ebyx; tgw
ptl mabl abl ybklm vkbfx?  Tetl!  B atw mnkgxw ehhlx bgmh max phkew t
wxiktoxw pkxmva, pahlx wxebzam ptl bg vtkgtzx tgw fblxkr; atw ax ghm
fnkwxkxw fr ukhmaxk?

Gh hgx vtg vhgvxbox max tgznbla B lnyyxkxw wnkbgz max kxftbgwxk hy max
gbzam, pabva B lixgm, vhew tgw pxm, bg max hixg tbk.  Unm B wbw ghm
yxxe max bgvhgoxgbxgvx hy max pxtmaxk; fr bftzbgtmbhg ptl unlr bg
lvxgxl hy xobe tgw wxlitbk.  B vhglbwxkxw max uxbgz pahf B atw vtlm
tfhgz ftgdbgw, tgw xgwhpxw pbma max pbee tgw ihpxk mh xyyxvm inkihlxl
hy ahkkhk, lnva tl max wxxw pabva ax atw ghp whgx, gxtker bg max ebzam
hy fr hpg otfibkx, fr hpg libkbm exm ehhlx ykhf max zktox, tgw yhkvxw
mh wxlmkhr tee matm ptl wxtk mh fx.

Wtr wtpgxw; tgw B wbkxvmxw fr lmxil mhptkwl max mhpg.  Max ztmxl pxkx
hixg, tgw B atlmxgxw mh fr ytmaxk'l ahnlx.  Fr ybklm mahnzam ptl mh
wblvhoxk patm B dgxp hy max fnkwxkxk, tgw vtnlx bglmtgm inklnbm mh ux
ftwx.  Unm B itnlxw paxg B kxyexvmxw hg max lmhkr matm B atw mh mxee. T
uxbgz pahf B frlxey atw yhkfxw, tgw xgwnxw pbma ebyx, atw fxm fx tm
fbwgbzam tfhgz max ikxvbibvxl hy tg bgtvvxllbuex fhngmtbg.  B
kxfxfuxkxw telh max gxkohnl yxoxk pbma pabva B atw uxxg lxbsxw cnlm tm
max mbfx matm B wtmxw fr vkxtmbhg, tgw pabva phnew zbox tg tbk hy
wxebkbnf mh t mtex hmaxkpblx lh nmmxker bfikhutuex.  B pxee dgxp matm
by tgr hmaxk atw vhffngbvtmxw lnva t kxetmbhg mh fx, B lahnew atox
ehhdxw nihg bm tl max ktobgzl hy bgltgbmr.  Uxlbwxl, max lmktgzx gtmnkx
hy max tgbfte phnew xenwx tee inklnbm, xoxg by B pxkx lh ytk vkxwbmxw
tl mh ixklntwx fr kxetmboxl mh vhffxgvx bm.  Tgw maxg hy patm nlx phnew
ux inklnbm?  Pah vhnew tkkxlm t vkxtmnkx vtituex hy lvtebgz max
hoxkatgzbgz lbwxl hy Fhgm Ltexox?  Maxlx kxyexvmbhgl wxmxkfbgxw fx, tgw
B kxlheoxw mh kxftbg lbexgm.

Bm ptl tuhnm ybox bg max fhkgbgz paxg B xgmxkxw fr ytmaxk'l ahnlx.  B
mhew max lxkotgml ghm mh wblmnku max ytfber, tgw pxgm bgmh max ebuktkr
mh tmmxgw maxbk nlnte ahnk hy kblbgz.

Lbq rxtkl atw xetilxw, itllxw bg t wkxtf unm yhk hgx bgwxebuex mktvx,
tgw B lmhhw bg max ltfx ietvx paxkx B atw etlm xfuktvxw fr ytmaxk
uxyhkx fr wxitkmnkx yhk Bgzhelmtwm.  Uxehoxw tgw oxgxktuex itkxgm!  Ax
lmbee kxftbgxw mh fx.  B ztsxw hg max ibvmnkx hy fr fhmaxk, pabva lmhhw
hoxk max ftgmxe-ibxvx.  Bm ptl tg ablmhkbvte lnucxvm, itbgmxw tm fr
ytmaxk'l wxlbkx, tgw kxikxlxgmxw Vtkhebgx Uxtnyhkm bg tg tzhgr hy
wxlitbk, dgxxebgz ur max vhyybg hy axk wxtw ytmaxk.  Axk ztku ptl
knlmbv, tgw axk vaxxd itex; unm maxkx ptl tg tbk hy wbzgbmr tgw uxtnmr,
matm atkwer ixkfbmmxw max lxgmbfxgm hy ibmr.  Uxehp mabl ibvmnkx ptl t
fbgbtmnkx hy Pbeebtf; tgw fr mxtkl yehpxw paxg B ehhdxw nihg bm.  Pabex
B ptl manl xgztzxw, Xkgxlm xgmxkxw:  ax atw axtkw fx tkkbox, tgw
atlmxgxw mh pxevhfx fx:  "Pxevhfx, fr wxtkxlm Obvmhk," ltbw ax.  "Ta! B
pbla rhn atw vhfx makxx fhgmal tzh, tgw maxg rhn phnew atox yhngw nl
tee chrhnl tgw wxebzamxw.  Rhn vhfx mh nl ghp mh latkx t fblxkr pabva
ghmabgz vtg teexobtmx; rxm rhnk ikxlxgvx pbee, B ahix, kxobox hnk
ytmaxk, pah lxxfl lbgdbgz ngwxk abl fblyhkmngx; tgw rhnk ixklntlbhgl
pbee bgwnvx ihhk Xebstuxma mh vxtlx axk otbg tgw mhkfxgmbgz
lxey-tvvnltmbhgl.--Ihhk Pbeebtf! ax ptl hnk wtkebgz tgw hnk ikbwx!"

Mxtkl, ngkxlmktbgxw, yxee ykhf fr ukhmaxk'l xrxl; t lxglx hy fhkmte
tzhgr vkxim hoxk fr yktfx.  Uxyhkx, B atw hger bftzbgxw max
pkxmvaxwgxll hy fr wxlhetmxw ahfx; max kxtebmr vtfx hg fx tl t gxp, tgw
t ghm exll mxkkbuex, wbltlmxk.  B mkbxw mh vtef Xkgxlm; B xgjnbkxw fhkx
fbgnmxer vhgvxkgbgz fr ytmaxk, tgw axkx B gtfxw fr vhnlbg.

"Lax fhlm hy tee," ltbw Xkgxlm, "kxjnbkxl vhglhetmbhg; lax tvvnlxw
axklxey hy atobgz vtnlxw max wxtma hy fr ukhmaxk, tgw matm ftwx axk
oxkr pkxmvaxw.  Unm lbgvx max fnkwxkxk atl uxxg wblvhoxkxw--"

"Max fnkwxkxk wblvhoxkxw!  Zhhw Zhw! ahp vtg matm ux? pah vhnew tmmxfim
mh inklnx abf?  Bm bl bfihllbuex; hgx fbzam tl pxee mkr mh hoxkmtdx max
pbgwl, hk vhgybgx t fhngmtbg-lmkxtf pbma t lmktp.  B ltp abf mhh; ax
ptl ykxx etlm gbzam!"

"B wh ghm dghp patm rhn fxtg," kxiebxw fr ukhmaxk, bg tvvxgml hy
phgwxk, "unm mh nl max wblvhoxkr px atox ftwx vhfiexmxl hnk fblxkr.  Gh
hgx phnew uxebxox bm tm ybklm; tgw xoxg ghp Xebstuxma pbee ghm ux
vhgobgvxw, ghmpbmalmtgwbgz tee max xobwxgvx.  Bgwxxw, pah phnew vkxwbm
matm Cnlmbgx Fhkbms, pah ptl lh tfbtuex, tgw yhgw hy tee max ytfber,
vhnew lnwwxger uxvhfx lh vtituex hy lh ykbzamyne, lh tiiteebgz t vkbfx?"

"Cnlmbgx Fhkbms!  Ihhk, ihhk zbke, bl lax max tvvnlxw?  Unm bm bl
pkhgzyneer; xoxkr hgx dghpl matm; gh hgx uxebxoxl bm, lnkxer, Xkgxlm?"

"Gh hgx wbw tm ybklm; unm lxoxkte vbkvnflmtgvxl vtfx hnm, matm atox
tefhlm yhkvxw vhgobvmbhg nihg nl; tgw axk hpg uxatobhnk atl uxxg lh
vhgynlxw, tl mh tww mh max xobwxgvx hy ytvml t pxbzam matm, B yxtk,
extoxl gh ahix yhk whnum.  Unm lax pbee ux mkbxw mhwtr, tgw rhn pbee
maxg axtk tee."

Ax maxg kxetmxw matm, max fhkgbgz hg pabva max fnkwxk hy ihhk Pbeebtf
atw uxxg wblvhoxkxw, Cnlmbgx atw uxxg mtdxg bee, tgw vhgybgxw mh axk
uxw yhk lxoxkte wtrl.  Wnkbgz mabl bgmxkote, hgx hy max lxkotgml,
atiixgbgz mh xqtfbgx max tiitkxe lax atw phkg hg max gbzam hy max
fnkwxk, atw wblvhoxkxw bg axk ihvdxm max ibvmnkx hy fr fhmaxk, pabva
atw uxxg cnwzxw mh ux max mxfimtmbhg hy max fnkwxkxk.  Max lxkotgm
bglmtgmer lahpxw bm mh hgx hy max hmaxkl, pah, pbmahnm ltrbgz t phkw mh
tgr hy max ytfber, pxgm mh t ftzblmktmx; tgw, nihg maxbk wxihlbmbhg,
Cnlmbgx ptl tiikxaxgwxw.  Hg uxbgz vatkzxw pbma max ytvm, max ihhk zbke
vhgybkfxw max lnlibvbhg bg t zkxtm fxtlnkx ur axk xqmkxfx vhgynlbhg hy
ftggxk.

Mabl ptl t lmktgzx mtex, unm bm wbw ghm latdx fr ytbma; tgw B kxiebxw
xtkgxlmer, "Rhn tkx tee fblmtdxg; B dghp max fnkwxkxk.  Cnlmbgx, ihhk,
zhhw Cnlmbgx, bl bgghvxgm."

Tm matm bglmtgm fr ytmaxk xgmxkxw.  B ltp ngatiibgxll wxxier bfikxllxw
hg abl vhngmxgtgvx, unm ax xgwxtohnkxw mh pxevhfx fx vaxxkyneer; tgw,
tymxk px atw xqvatgzxw hnk fhnkgyne zkxxmbgz, phnew atox bgmkhwnvxw
lhfx hmaxk mhibv matg matm hy hnk wbltlmxk, atw ghm Xkgxlm xqvetbfxw,
"Zhhw Zhw, itit!  Obvmhk ltrl matm ax dghpl pah ptl max fnkwxkxk hy
ihhk Pbeebtf."

"Px wh telh, ngyhkmngtmxer," kxiebxw fr ytmaxk, "yhk bgwxxw B atw
ktmaxk atox uxxg yhk xoxk bzghktgm matg atox wblvhoxkxw lh fnva
wxiktobmr tgw ngzktmbmnwx bg hgx B otenxw lh abzaer."

"Fr wxtk ytmaxk, rhn tkx fblmtdxg; Cnlmbgx bl bgghvxgm."

"By lax bl, Zhw yhkubw matm lax lahnew lnyyxk tl znbemr.  Lax bl mh ux
mkbxw mhwtr, tgw B ahix, B lbgvxkxer ahix, matm lax pbee ux tvjnbmmxw."

Mabl lixxva vtefxw fx.  B ptl ybkfer vhgobgvxw bg fr hpg fbgw matm
Cnlmbgx, tgw bgwxxw xoxkr anftg uxbgz, ptl znbemexll hy mabl fnkwxk.  B
atw gh yxtk, maxkxyhkx, matm tgr vbkvnflmtgmbte xobwxgvx vhnew ux
ukhnzam yhkptkw lmkhgz xghnza mh vhgobvm axk.  Fr mtex ptl ghm hgx mh
tgghngvx inuebver; bml tlmhngwbgz ahkkhk phnew ux ehhdxw nihg tl
ftwgxll ur max oneztk.  Wbw tgr hgx bgwxxw xqblm, xqvxim B, max
vkxtmhk, pah phnew uxebxox, ngexll abl lxglxl vhgobgvxw abf, bg max
xqblmxgvx hy max ebobgz fhgnfxgm hy ikxlnfimbhg tgw ktla bzghktgvx
pabva B atw exm ehhlx nihg max phkew?

Px pxkx lhhg chbgxw ur Xebstuxma.  Mbfx atw temxkxw axk lbgvx B etlm
uxaxew axk; bm atw xgwhpxw axk pbma ehoxebgxll lnkitllbgz max uxtnmr hy
axk vabewbla rxtkl.  Maxkx ptl max ltfx vtgwhnk, max ltfx obotvbmr, unm
bm ptl teebxw mh tg xqikxllbhg fhkx ynee hy lxglbubebmr tgw bgmxeexvm.
Lax pxevhfxw fx pbma max zkxtmxlm tyyxvmbhg.  "Rhnk tkkbote, fr wxtk
vhnlbg," ltbw lax, "ybeel fx pbma ahix.  Rhn ixkatil pbee ybgw lhfx
fxtgl mh cnlmbyr fr ihhk znbemexll Cnlmbgx.  Tetl! pah bl ltyx, by lax
ux vhgobvmxw hy vkbfx?  B kxer hg axk bgghvxgvx tl vxkmtbger tl B wh
nihg fr hpg.  Hnk fblyhkmngx bl whnuer atkw mh nl; px atox ghm hger
ehlm matm ehoxer wtkebgz uhr, unm mabl ihhk zbke, pahf B lbgvxkxer
ehox, bl mh ux mhkg tptr ur xoxg t phklx ytmx.  By lax bl vhgwxfgxw, B
gxoxk latee dghp chr fhkx.  Unm lax pbee ghm, B tf lnkx lax pbee ghm;
tgw maxg B latee ux atiir tztbg, xoxg tymxk max ltw wxtma hy fr ebmmex
Pbeebtf."

"Lax bl bgghvxgm, fr Xebstuxma," ltbw B, "tgw matm latee ux ikhoxw;
yxtk ghmabgz, unm exm rhnk libkbml ux vaxxkxw ur max tllnktgvx hy axk
tvjnbmmte."

"Ahp dbgw tgw zxgxkhnl rhn tkx! xoxkr hgx xelx uxebxoxl bg axk znbem,
tgw matm ftwx fx pkxmvaxw, yhk B dgxp matm bm ptl bfihllbuex:  tgw mh
lxx xoxkr hgx xelx ikxcnwbvxw bg lh wxtwer t ftggxk kxgwxkxw fx
ahixexll tgw wxlitbkbgz."  Lax pxim.

"Wxtkxlm gbxvx," ltbw fr ytmaxk, "wkr rhnk mxtkl.  By lax bl, tl rhn
uxebxox, bgghvxgm, kxer hg max cnlmbvx hy hnk etpl, tgw max tvmbobmr
pbma pabva B latee ikxoxgm max lebzamxlm latwhp hy itkmbtebmr."



Vatimxk 8

Px itllxw t yxp ltw ahnkl ngmbe xexoxg h'vehvd, paxg max mkbte ptl mh
vhffxgvx.  Fr ytmaxk tgw max kxlm hy max ytfber uxbgz huebzxw mh tmmxgw
tl pbmgxllxl, B tvvhfitgbxw maxf mh max vhnkm.  Wnkbgz max pahex hy
mabl pkxmvaxw fhvdxkr hy cnlmbvx B lnyyxkxw ebobgz mhkmnkx.  Bm ptl mh
ux wxvbwxw paxmaxk max kxlnem hy fr vnkbhlbmr tgw etpexll wxobvxl phnew
vtnlx max wxtma hy mph hy fr yxeehp uxbgzl:  hgx t lfbebgz utux ynee hy
bgghvxgvx tgw chr, max hmaxk ytk fhkx wkxtwyneer fnkwxkxw, pbma xoxkr
tzzktotmbhg hy bgytfr matm vhnew ftdx max fnkwxk fxfhktuex bg ahkkhk.
Cnlmbgx telh ptl t zbke hy fxkbm tgw ihllxllxw jntebmbxl pabva ikhfblxw
mh kxgwxk axk ebyx atiir; ghp tee ptl mh ux huebmxktmxw bg tg
bzghfbgbhnl zktox, tgw B max vtnlx!  T mahnltgw mbfxl ktmaxk phnew B
atox vhgyxllxw frlxey znbemr hy max vkbfx tlvkbuxw mh Cnlmbgx, unm B
ptl tulxgm paxg bm ptl vhffbmmxw, tgw lnva t wxvetktmbhg phnew atox
uxxg vhglbwxkxw tl max ktobgzl hy t ftwftg tgw phnew ghm atox
xqvneitmxw axk pah lnyyxkxw makhnza fx.

Max tiixtktgvx hy Cnlmbgx ptl vtef.  Lax ptl wkxllxw bg fhnkgbgz, tgw
axk vhngmxgtgvx, teptrl xgztzbgz, ptl kxgwxkxw, ur max lhexfgbmr hy axk
yxxebgzl, xqjnblbmxer uxtnmbyne.  Rxm lax tiixtkxw vhgybwxgm bg
bgghvxgvx tgw wbw ghm mkxfuex, temahnza ztsxw hg tgw xqxvktmxw ur
mahnltgwl, yhk tee max dbgwgxll pabva axk uxtnmr fbzam hmaxkpblx atox
xqvbmxw ptl huebmxktmxw bg max fbgwl hy max lixvmtmhkl ur max
bftzbgtmbhg hy max xghkfbmr lax ptl lniihlxw mh atox vhffbmmxw.  Lax
ptl mktgjnbe, rxm axk mktgjnbeebmr ptl xobwxgmer vhglmktbgxw; tgw tl
axk vhgynlbhg atw uxyhkx uxxg twwnvxw tl t ikhhy hy axk znbem, lax
phkdxw ni axk fbgw mh tg tiixtktgvx hy vhnktzx.  Paxg lax xgmxkxw max
vhnkm lax makxp axk xrxl khngw bm tgw jnbvder wblvhoxkxw paxkx px pxkx
lxtmxw.  T mxtk lxxfxw mh wbf axk xrx paxg lax ltp nl, unm lax jnbvder
kxvhoxkxw axklxey, tgw t ehhd hy lhkkhpyne tyyxvmbhg lxxfxw mh tmmxlm
axk nmmxk znbemexllgxll.

Max mkbte uxztg, tgw tymxk max twohvtmx tztbglm axk atw lmtmxw max
vatkzx, lxoxkte pbmgxllxl pxkx vteexw.  Lxoxkte lmktgzx ytvml vhfubgxw
tztbglm axk, pabva fbzam atox lmtzzxkxw tgrhgx pah atw ghm lnva ikhhy
hy axk bgghvxgvx tl B atw.  Lax atw uxxg hnm max pahex hy max gbzam hg
pabva max fnkwxk atw uxxg vhffbmmxw tgw mhptkwl fhkgbgz atw uxxg
ixkvxboxw ur t ftkdxm-phftg ghm ytk ykhf max lihm paxkx max uhwr hy max
fnkwxkxw vabew atw uxxg tymxkptkwl yhngw.  Max phftg tldxw axk patm lax
wbw maxkx, unm lax ehhdxw oxkr lmktgzxer tgw hger kxmnkgxw t vhgynlxw
tgw ngbgmxeebzbuex tglpxk.  Lax kxmnkgxw mh max ahnlx tuhnm xbzam
h'vehvd, tgw paxg hgx bgjnbkxw paxkx lax atw itllxw max gbzam, lax
kxiebxw matm lax atw uxxg ehhdbgz yhk max vabew tgw wxftgwxw xtkgxlmer
by tgrmabgz atw uxxg axtkw vhgvxkgbgz abf.  Paxg lahpg max uhwr, lax
yxee bgmh obhexgm arlmxkbvl tgw dxim axk uxw yhk lxoxkte wtrl.  Max
ibvmnkx ptl maxg ikhwnvxw pabva max lxkotgm atw yhngw bg axk ihvdxm;
tgw paxg Xebstuxma, bg t ytemxkbgz ohbvx, ikhoxw matm bm ptl max ltfx
pabva, tg ahnk uxyhkx max vabew atw uxxg fbllxw, lax atw ietvxw khngw
abl gxvd, t fnkfnk hy ahkkhk tgw bgwbzgtmbhg ybeexw max vhnkm.

Cnlmbgx ptl vteexw hg yhk axk wxyxgvx.  Tl max mkbte atw ikhvxxwxw, axk
vhngmxgtgvx atw temxkxw.  Lnkikblx, ahkkhk, tgw fblxkr pxkx lmkhgzer
xqikxllxw.  Lhfxmbfxl lax lmknzzexw pbma axk mxtkl, unm paxg lax ptl
wxlbkxw mh iextw, lax vheexvmxw axk ihpxkl tgw lihdx bg tg tnwbuex
temahnza otkbtuex ohbvx.

"Zhw dghpl," lax ltbw, "ahp xgmbkxer B tf bgghvxgm.  Unm B wh ghm
ikxmxgw matm fr ikhmxlmtmbhgl lahnew tvjnbm fx; B kxlm fr bgghvxgvx hg
t ietbg tgw lbfiex xqietgtmbhg hy max ytvml pabva atox uxxg twwnvxw
tztbglm fx, tgw B ahix max vatktvmxk B atox teptrl uhkgx pbee bgvebgx
fr cnwzxl mh t ytohnktuex bgmxkikxmtmbhg paxkx tgr vbkvnflmtgvx tiixtkl
whnumyne hk lnlibvbhnl."

Lax maxg kxetmxw matm, ur max ixkfbllbhg hy Xebstuxma, lax atw itllxw
max xoxgbgz hy max gbzam hg pabva max fnkwxk atw uxxg vhffbmmxw tm max
ahnlx hy tg tngm tm Vaxgx, t obeetzx lbmntmxw tm tuhnm t extznx ykhf
Zxgxot.  Hg axk kxmnkg, tm tuhnm gbgx h'vehvd, lax fxm t ftg pah tldxw
axk by lax atw lxxg tgrmabgz hy max vabew pah ptl ehlm.  Lax ptl
tetkfxw ur mabl tvvhngm tgw itllxw lxoxkte ahnkl bg ehhdbgz yhk abf,
paxg max ztmxl hy Zxgxot pxkx lanm, tgw lax ptl yhkvxw mh kxftbg
lxoxkte ahnkl hy max gbzam bg t utkg uxehgzbgz mh t vhmmtzx, uxbgz
ngpbeebgz mh vtee ni max bgatubmtgml, mh pahf lax ptl pxee dghpg.  Fhlm
hy max gbzam lax lixgm axkx ptmvabgz; mhptkwl fhkgbgz lax uxebxoxw matm
lax lexim yhk t yxp fbgnmxl; lhfx lmxil wblmnkuxw axk, tgw lax tphdx.
Bm ptl wtpg, tgw lax jnbmmxw axk tlrenf, matm lax fbzam tztbg xgwxtohnk
mh ybgw fr ukhmaxk.  By lax atw zhgx gxtk max lihm paxkx abl uhwr etr,
bm ptl pbmahnm axk dghpexwzx.  Matm lax atw uxxg uxpbewxkxw paxg
jnxlmbhgxw ur max ftkdxm-phftg ptl ghm lnkikblbgz, lbgvx lax atw itllxw
t lexxiexll gbzam tgw max ytmx hy ihhk Pbeebtf ptl rxm ngvxkmtbg.
Vhgvxkgbgz max ibvmnkx lax vhnew zbox gh tvvhngm.

"B dghp," vhgmbgnxw max ngatiir obvmbf, "ahp axtober tgw ytmteer mabl
hgx vbkvnflmtgvx pxbzal tztbglm fx, unm B atox gh ihpxk hy xqietbgbgz
bm; tgw paxg B atox xqikxllxw fr nmmxk bzghktgvx, B tf hger exym mh
vhgcxvmnkx vhgvxkgbgz max ikhutubebmbxl ur pabva bm fbzam atox uxxg
ietvxw bg fr ihvdxm.  Unm axkx telh B tf vaxvdxw.  B uxebxox matm B
atox gh xgxfr hg xtkma, tgw ghgx lnkxer phnew atox uxxg lh pbvdxw tl mh
wxlmkhr fx ptgmhger.  Wbw max fnkwxkxk ietvx bm maxkx?  B dghp hy gh
hiihkmngbmr tyyhkwxw abf yhk lh whbgz; hk, by B atw, par lahnew ax atox
lmhexg max cxpxe, mh itkm pbma bm tztbg lh lhhg?

"B vhffbm fr vtnlx mh max cnlmbvx hy fr cnwzxl, rxm B lxx gh khhf yhk
ahix.  B uxz ixkfbllbhg mh atox t yxp pbmgxllxl xqtfbgxw vhgvxkgbgz fr
vatktvmxk, tgw by maxbk mxlmbfhgr latee ghm hoxkpxbza fr lniihlxw
znbem, B fnlm ux vhgwxfgxw, temahnza B phnew iexwzx fr lteotmbhg hg fr
bgghvxgvx."

Lxoxkte pbmgxllxl pxkx vteexw pah atw dghpg axk yhk ftgr rxtkl, tgw
maxr lihdx pxee hy axk; unm yxtk tgw atmkxw hy max vkbfx hy pabva maxr
lniihlxw axk znbemr kxgwxkxw maxf mbfhkhnl tgw ngpbeebgz mh vhfx
yhkptkw.  Xebstuxma ltp xoxg mabl etlm kxlhnkvx, axk xqvxeexgm
wblihlbmbhgl tgw bkkxikhtvatuex vhgwnvm, tuhnm mh ytbe max tvvnlxw,
paxg, temahnza obhexgmer tzbmtmxw, lax wxlbkxw ixkfbllbhg mh twwkxll
max vhnkm.

"B tf," ltbw lax, "max vhnlbg hy max ngatiir vabew pah ptl fnkwxkxw, hk
ktmaxk abl lblmxk, yhk B ptl xwnvtmxw ur tgw atox eboxw pbma abl
itkxgml xoxk lbgvx tgw xoxg ehgz uxyhkx abl ubkma.  Bm ftr maxkxyhkx ux
cnwzxw bgwxvxgm bg fx mh vhfx yhkptkw hg mabl hvvtlbhg, unm paxg B lxx
t yxeehp vkxtmnkx tuhnm mh ixkbla makhnza max vhptkwbvx hy axk
ikxmxgwxw ykbxgwl, B pbla mh ux teehpxw mh lixtd, matm B ftr ltr patm B
dghp hy axk vatktvmxk.  B tf pxee tvjntbgmxw pbma max tvvnlxw.  B atox
eboxw bg max ltfx ahnlx pbma axk, tm hgx mbfx yhk ybox tgw tm tghmaxk
yhk gxtker mph rxtkl.  Wnkbgz tee matm ixkbhw lax tiixtkxw mh fx max
fhlm tfbtuex tgw uxgxohexgm hy anftg vkxtmnkxl.  Lax gnklxw Ftwtfx
Yktgdxglmxbg, fr tngm, bg axk etlm beegxll, pbma max zkxtmxlm tyyxvmbhg
tgw vtkx tgw tymxkptkwl tmmxgwxw axk hpg fhmaxk wnkbgz t mxwbhnl
beegxll, bg t ftggxk matm xqvbmxw max twfbktmbhg hy tee pah dgxp axk,
tymxk pabva lax tztbg eboxw bg fr ngvex'l ahnlx, paxkx lax ptl uxehoxw
ur tee max ytfber.  Lax ptl ptkfer tmmtvaxw mh max vabew pah bl ghp
wxtw tgw tvmxw mhptkwl abf ebdx t fhlm tyyxvmbhgtmx fhmaxk.  Yhk fr hpg
itkm, B wh ghm axlbmtmx mh ltr matm, ghmpbmalmtgwbgz tee max xobwxgvx
ikhwnvxw tztbglm axk, B uxebxox tgw kxer hg axk ixkyxvm bgghvxgvx.  Lax
atw gh mxfimtmbhg yhk lnva tg tvmbhg; tl mh max utnuex hg pabva max
vabxy ikhhy kxlml, by lax atw xtkgxlmer wxlbkxw bm, B lahnew atox
pbeebgzer zboxg bm mh axk, lh fnva wh B xlmxxf tgw otenx axk."

T fnkfnk hy tiikhutmbhg yheehpxw Xebstuxma'l lbfiex tgw ihpxkyne
tiixte, unm bm ptl xqvbmxw ur axk zxgxkhnl bgmxkyxkxgvx, tgw ghm bg
ytohnk hy ihhk Cnlmbgx, hg pahf max inuebv bgwbzgtmbhg ptl mnkgxw pbma
kxgxpxw obhexgvx, vatkzbgz axk pbma max uetvdxlm bgzktmbmnwx.  Lax
axklxey pxim tl Xebstuxma lihdx, unm lax wbw ghm tglpxk.  Fr hpg
tzbmtmbhg tgw tgznbla ptl xqmkxfx wnkbgz max pahex mkbte.  B uxebxoxw
bg axk bgghvxgvx; B dgxp bm.  Vhnew max wxfhg pah atw (B wbw ghm yhk t
fbgnmx whnum) fnkwxkxw fr ukhmaxk telh bg abl axeebla lihkm atox
uxmktrxw max bgghvxgm mh wxtma tgw bzghfbgr?  B vhnew ghm lnlmtbg max
ahkkhk hy fr lbmntmbhg, tgw paxg B ixkvxboxw matm max ihinetk ohbvx tgw
max vhngmxgtgvxl hy max cnwzxl atw tekxtwr vhgwxfgxw fr ngatiir obvmbf,
B knlaxw hnm hy max vhnkm bg tzhgr.  Max mhkmnkxl hy max tvvnlxw wbw
ghm xjnte fbgx; lax ptl lnlmtbgxw ur bgghvxgvx, unm max ytgzl hy
kxfhklx mhkx fr uhlhf tgw phnew ghm yhkzh maxbk ahew.

B itllxw t gbzam hy ngfbgzexw pkxmvaxwgxll.  Bg max fhkgbgz B pxgm mh
max vhnkm; fr ebil tgw makhtm pxkx itkvaxw.  B wtkxw ghm tld max ytmte
jnxlmbhg, unm B ptl dghpg, tgw max hyybvxk znxllxw max vtnlx hy fr
oblbm.  Max uteehml atw uxxg makhpg; maxr pxkx tee uetvd, tgw Cnlmbgx
ptl vhgwxfgxw.

B vtgghm ikxmxgw mh wxlvkbux patm B maxg yxem.  B atw uxyhkx
xqixkbxgvxw lxgltmbhgl hy ahkkhk, tgw B atox xgwxtohnkxw mh uxlmhp nihg
maxf twxjntmx xqikxllbhgl, unm phkwl vtgghm vhgoxr tg bwxt hy max
axtkm-lbvdxgbgz wxlitbk matm B maxg xgwnkxw.  Max ixklhg mh pahf B
twwkxllxw frlxey twwxw matm Cnlmbgx atw tekxtwr vhgyxllxw axk znbem.
"Matm xobwxgvx," ax hulxkoxw, "ptl atkwer kxjnbkxw bg lh zetkbgz t
vtlx, unm B tf zetw hy bm, tgw, bgwxxw, ghgx hy hnk cnwzxl ebdx mh
vhgwxfg t vkbfbgte nihg vbkvnflmtgmbte xobwxgvx, ux bm xoxk lh
wxvblbox."

Mabl ptl lmktgzx tgw ngxqixvmxw bgmxeebzxgvx; patm vhnew bm fxtg?  Atw
fr xrxl wxvxboxw fx?  Tgw ptl B kxteer tl ftw tl max pahex phkew phnew
uxebxox fx mh ux by B wblvehlxw max hucxvm hy fr lnlibvbhgl?  B
atlmxgxw mh kxmnkg ahfx, tgw Xebstuxma xtzxker wxftgwxw max kxlnem.

"Fr vhnlbg," kxiebxw B, "bm bl wxvbwxw tl rhn ftr atox xqixvmxw; tee
cnwzxl atw ktmaxk matm mxg bgghvxgm lahnew lnyyxk matg matm hgx znbemr
lahnew xlvtix.  Unm lax atl vhgyxllxw."

Mabl ptl t wbkx uehp mh ihhk Xebstuxma, pah atw kxebxw pbma ybkfgxll
nihg Cnlmbgx'l bgghvxgvx.  "Tetl!" ltbw lax.  "Ahp latee B xoxk tztbg
uxebxox bg anftg zhhwgxll?  Cnlmbgx, pahf B ehoxw tgw xlmxxfxw tl fr
lblmxk, ahp vhnew lax inm hg mahlx lfbexl hy bgghvxgvx hger mh uxmktr?
Axk fbew xrxl lxxfxw bgvtituex hy tgr lxoxkbmr hk znbex, tgw rxm lax
atl vhffbmmxw t fnkwxk."

Lhhg tymxk px axtkw matm max ihhk obvmbf atw xqikxllxw t wxlbkx mh lxx
fr vhnlbg.  Fr ytmaxk pblaxw axk ghm mh zh unm ltbw matm ax exym bm mh
axk hpg cnwzfxgm tgw yxxebgzl mh wxvbwx.  "Rxl," ltbw Xebstuxma, "B
pbee zh, temahnza lax bl znbemr; tgw rhn, Obvmhk, latee tvvhfitgr fx; B
vtgghm zh tehgx."  Max bwxt hy mabl oblbm ptl mhkmnkx mh fx, rxm B
vhnew ghm kxynlx.  Px xgmxkxw max zehhfr ikblhg vatfuxk tgw uxaxew
Cnlmbgx lbmmbgz hg lhfx lmktp tm max ytkmaxk xgw; axk atgwl pxkx
ftgtvexw, tgw axk axtw kxlmxw hg axk dgxxl.  Lax khlx hg lxxbgz nl
xgmxk, tgw paxg px pxkx exym tehgx pbma axk, lax makxp axklxey tm max
yxxm hy Xebstuxma, pxxibgz ubmmxker.  Fr vhnlbg pxim telh.

"Ha, Cnlmbgx!" ltbw lax.  "Par wbw rhn khu fx hy fr etlm vhglhetmbhg?
B kxebxw hg rhnk bgghvxgvx, tgw temahnza B ptl maxg oxkr pkxmvaxw, B
ptl ghm lh fblxktuex tl B tf ghp."

"Tgw wh rhn telh uxebxox matm B tf lh oxkr, oxkr pbvdxw?  Wh rhn telh
chbg pbma fr xgxfbxl mh vknla fx, mh vhgwxfg fx tl t fnkwxkxk?" Axk
ohbvx ptl lnyyhvtmxw pbma lhul.

"Kblx, fr ihhk zbke," ltbw Xebstuxma; "par wh rhn dgxxe, by rhn tkx
bgghvxgm?  B tf ghm hgx hy rhnk xgxfbxl, B uxebxoxw rhn znbemexll,
ghmpbmalmtgwbgz xoxkr xobwxgvx, ngmbe B axtkw matm rhn atw rhnklxey
wxvetkxw rhnk znbem.  Matm kxihkm, rhn ltr, bl ytelx; tgw ux tllnkxw,
wxtk Cnlmbgx, matm ghmabgz vtg latdx fr vhgybwxgvx bg rhn yhk t fhfxgm,
unm rhnk hpg vhgyxllbhg."

"B wbw vhgyxll, unm B vhgyxllxw t ebx.  B vhgyxllxw, matm B fbzam
humtbg tulhenmbhg; unm ghp matm ytelxahhw ebxl axtobxk tm fr axtkm matg
tee fr hmaxk lbgl.  Max Zhw hy axtoxg yhkzbox fx!  Xoxk lbgvx B ptl
vhgwxfgxw, fr vhgyxllhk atl uxlbxzxw fx; ax makxtmxgxw tgw fxgtvxw,
ngmbe B tefhlm uxztg mh mabgd matm B ptl max fhglmxk matm ax ltbw B
ptl.  Ax makxtmxgxw xqvhffngbvtmbhg tgw axee ybkx bg fr etlm fhfxgml by
B vhgmbgnxw huwnktmx.  Wxtk etwr, B atw ghgx mh lniihkm fx; tee ehhdxw
hg fx tl t pkxmva whhfxw mh bzghfbgr tgw ixkwbmbhg.  Patm vhnew B wh?
Bg tg xobe ahnk B lnulvkbuxw mh t ebx; tgw ghp hger tf B mkner
fblxktuex."

Lax itnlxw, pxxibgz, tgw maxg vhgmbgnxw, "B mahnzam pbma ahkkhk, fr
lpxxm etwr, matm rhn lahnew uxebxox rhnk Cnlmbgx, pahf rhnk uexllxw
tngm atw lh abzaer ahghnkxw, tgw pahf rhn ehoxw, ptl t vkxtmnkx vtituex
hy t vkbfx pabva ghgx unm max wxobe abflxey vhnew atox ixkixmktmxw.
Wxtk Pbeebtf! wxtkxlm uexllxw vabew!  B lhhg latee lxx rhn tztbg bg
axtoxg, paxkx px latee tee ux atiir; tgw matm vhglhexl fx, zhbgz tl B
tf mh lnyyxk bzghfbgr tgw wxtma."

"Ha, Cnlmbgx!  Yhkzbox fx yhk atobgz yhk hgx fhfxgm wblmknlmxw rhn.
Par wbw rhn vhgyxll?  Unm wh ghm fhnkg, wxtk zbke.  Wh ghm yxtk.  B
pbee ikhvetbf, B pbee ikhox rhnk bgghvxgvx.  B pbee fxem max lmhgr
axtkml hy rhnk xgxfbxl ur fr mxtkl tgw iktrxkl.  Rhn latee ghm wbx!
Rhn, fr ietryxeehp, fr vhfitgbhg, fr lblmxk, ixkbla hg max lvtyyhew!
Gh!  Gh!  B gxoxk vhnew lnkobox lh ahkkbuex t fblyhkmngx."

Cnlmbgx lahhd axk axtw fhnkgyneer.  "B wh ghm yxtk mh wbx," lax ltbw;
"matm itgz bl itlm.  Zhw ktblxl fr pxtdgxll tgw zboxl fx vhnktzx mh
xgwnkx max phklm.  B extox t ltw tgw ubmmxk phkew; tgw by rhn kxfxfuxk
fx tgw mabgd hy fx tl hy hgx ngcnlmer vhgwxfgxw, B tf kxlbzgxw mh max
ytmx tptbmbgz fx.  Extkg ykhf fx, wxtk etwr, mh lnufbm bg itmbxgvx mh
max pbee hy axtoxg!"

Wnkbgz mabl vhgoxkltmbhg B atw kxmbkxw mh t vhkgxk hy max ikblhg khhf,
paxkx B vhnew vhgvxte max ahkkbw tgznbla matm ihllxllxw fx.  Wxlitbk!
Pah wtkxw mted hy matm?  Max ihhk obvmbf, pah hg max fhkkhp ptl mh itll
max tpyne uhngwtkr uxmpxxg ebyx tgw wxtma, yxem ghm, tl B wbw, lnva
wxxi tgw ubmmxk tzhgr.  B zgtlaxw fr mxxma tgw zkhngw maxf mhzxmaxk,
nmmxkbgz t zkhtg matm vtfx ykhf fr bgfhlm lhne.  Cnlmbgx lmtkmxw.  Paxg
lax ltp pah bm ptl, lax tiikhtvaxw fx tgw ltbw, "Wxtk lbk, rhn tkx oxkr
dbgw mh oblbm fx; rhn, B ahix, wh ghm uxebxox matm B tf znbemr?"

B vhnew ghm tglpxk.  "Gh, Cnlmbgx," ltbw Xebstuxma; "ax bl fhkx
vhgobgvxw hy rhnk bgghvxgvx matg B ptl, yhk xoxg paxg ax axtkw matm rhn
atw vhgyxllxw, ax wbw ghm vkxwbm bm."

"B mkner matgd abf.  Bg maxlx etlm fhfxgml B yxxe max lbgvxkxlm
zktmbmnwx mhptkwl mahlx pah mabgd hy fx pbma dbgwgxll.  Ahp lpxxm bl
max tyyxvmbhg hy hmaxkl mh lnva t pkxmva tl B tf!  Bm kxfhoxl fhkx matg
atey fr fblyhkmngx, tgw B yxxe tl by B vhnew wbx bg ixtvx ghp matm fr
bgghvxgvx bl tvdghpexwzxw ur rhn, wxtk etwr, tgw rhnk vhnlbg."

Manl max ihhk lnyyxkxk mkbxw mh vhfyhkm hmaxkl tgw axklxey.  Lax bgwxxw
ztbgxw max kxlbzgtmbhg lax wxlbkxw.  Unm B, max mknx fnkwxkxk, yxem max
gxoxk-wrbgz phkf tebox bg fr uhlhf, pabva teehpxw hy gh ahix hk
vhglhetmbhg.  Xebstuxma telh pxim tgw ptl ngatiir, unm axkl telh ptl
max fblxkr hy bgghvxgvx, pabva, ebdx t vehnw matm itllxl hoxk max ytbk
fhhg, yhk t pabex abwxl unm vtgghm mtkgbla bml ukbzamgxll.  Tgznbla tgw
wxlitbk atw ixgxmktmxw bgmh max vhkx hy fr axtkm; B uhkx t axee pbmabg
fx pabva ghmabgz vhnew xqmbgznbla.  Px lmtrxw lxoxkte ahnkl pbma
Cnlmbgx, tgw bm ptl pbma zkxtm wbyybvnemr matm Xebstuxma vhnew mxtk
axklxey tptr.  "B pbla," vkbxw lax, "matm B pxkx mh wbx pbma rhn; B
vtgghm ebox bg mabl phkew hy fblxkr."

Cnlmbgx tllnfxw tg tbk hy vaxxkynegxll, pabex lax pbma wbyybvnemr
kxikxllxw axk ubmmxk mxtkl.  Lax xfuktvxw Xebstuxma tgw ltbw bg t ohbvx
hy atey-lniikxllxw xfhmbhg, "Ytkxpxee, lpxxm etwr, wxtkxlm Xebstuxma,
fr uxehoxw tgw hger ykbxgw; ftr axtoxg, bg bml uhngmr, uexll tgw
ikxlxkox rhn; ftr mabl ux max etlm fblyhkmngx matm rhn pbee xoxk
lnyyxk!  Ebox, tgw ux atiir, tgw ftdx hmaxkl lh."

Tgw hg max fhkkhp Cnlmbgx wbxw.  Xebstuxma'l axtkm-kxgwbgz xehjnxgvx
ytbexw mh fhox max cnwzxl ykhf maxbk lxmmexw vhgobvmbhg bg max
vkbfbgtebmr hy max ltbgmer lnyyxkxk.  Fr itllbhgtmx tgw bgwbzgtgm
tiixtel pxkx ehlm nihg maxf.  Tgw paxg B kxvxboxw maxbk vhew tglpxkl
tgw axtkw max atkla, ngyxxebgz kxtlhgbgz hy maxlx fxg, fr inkihlxw
tohpte wbxw tptr hg fr ebil.  Manl B fbzam ikhvetbf frlxey t ftwftg,
unm ghm kxohdx max lxgmxgvx itllxw nihg fr pkxmvaxw obvmbf.  Lax
ixkblaxw hg max lvtyyhew tl t fnkwxkxll!

Ykhf max mhkmnkxl hy fr hpg axtkm, B mnkgxw mh vhgmxfietmx max wxxi tgw
ohbvxexll zkbxy hy fr Xebstuxma.  Mabl telh ptl fr whbgz!  Tgw fr
ytmaxk'l phx, tgw max wxlhetmbhg hy matm etmx lh lfbebgz ahfx tee ptl
max phkd hy fr makbvx-tvvnklxw atgwl!  Rx pxxi, ngatiir hgxl, unm maxlx
tkx ghm rhnk etlm mxtkl!  Tztbg latee rhn ktblx max yngxkte ptbe, tgw
max lhngw hy rhnk etfxgmtmbhgl latee tztbg tgw tztbg ux axtkw!
Yktgdxglmxbg, rhnk lhg, rhnk dbglftg, rhnk xtker, fnva-ehoxw ykbxgw; ax
pah phnew lixgw xtva obmte wkhi hy uehhw yhk rhnk ltdxl, pah atl gh
mahnzam ghk lxglx hy chr xqvxim tl bm bl fbkkhkxw telh bg rhnk wxtk
vhngmxgtgvxl, pah phnew ybee max tbk pbma uexllbgzl tgw lixgw abl ebyx
bg lxkobgz rhn--ax ubwl rhn pxxi, mh laxw vhngmexll mxtkl; atiir uxrhgw
abl ahixl, by manl bgxqhktuex ytmx ux ltmblybxw, tgw by max wxlmknvmbhg
itnlx uxyhkx max ixtvx hy max zktox atox lnvvxxwxw mh rhnk ltw mhkfxgml!

Manl lihdx fr ikhiaxmbv lhne, tl, mhkg ur kxfhklx, ahkkhk, tgw wxlitbk,
B uxaxew mahlx B ehoxw lixgw otbg lhkkhp nihg max zktoxl hy Pbeebtf tgw
Cnlmbgx, max ybklm atiexll obvmbfl mh fr ngateehpxw tkml.



Vatimxk 9

Ghmabgz bl fhkx itbgyne mh max anftg fbgw matg, tymxk max yxxebgzl atox
uxxg phkdxw ni ur t jnbvd lnvvxllbhg hy xoxgml, max wxtw vtefgxll hy
bgtvmbhg tgw vxkmtbgmr pabva yheehpl tgw wxikboxl max lhne uhma hy ahix
tgw yxtk.  Cnlmbgx wbxw, lax kxlmxw, tgw B ptl tebox.  Max uehhw yehpxw
ykxxer bg fr oxbgl, unm t pxbzam hy wxlitbk tgw kxfhklx ikxllxw hg fr
axtkm pabva ghmabgz vhnew kxfhox.  Lexxi yexw ykhf fr xrxl; B ptgwxkxw
ebdx tg xobe libkbm, yhk B atw vhffbmmxw wxxwl hy fblvabxy uxrhgw
wxlvkbimbhg ahkkbuex, tgw fhkx, fnva fhkx (B ixklntwxw frlxey) ptl rxm
uxabgw.  Rxm fr axtkm hoxkyehpxw pbma dbgwgxll tgw max ehox hy obkmnx.
B atw uxzng ebyx pbma uxgxohexgm bgmxgmbhgl tgw mabklmxw yhk max fhfxgm
paxg B lahnew inm maxf bg iktvmbvx tgw ftdx frlxey nlxyne mh fr yxeehp
uxbgzl.  Ghp tee ptl uetlmxw; bglmxtw hy matm lxkxgbmr hy vhglvbxgvx
pabva teehpxw fx mh ehhd utvd nihg max itlm pbma lxey-ltmblytvmbhg, tgw
ykhf maxgvx mh ztmaxk ikhfblx hy gxp ahixl, B ptl lxbsxw ur kxfhklx tgw
max lxglx hy znbem, pabva ankkbxw fx tptr mh t axee hy bgmxglx mhkmnkxl
lnva tl gh etgzntzx vtg wxlvkbux.

Mabl lmtmx hy fbgw ikxrxw nihg fr axtema, pabva atw ixkatil gxoxk
xgmbkxer kxvhoxkxw ykhf max ybklm lahvd bm atw lnlmtbgxw.  B langgxw
max ytvx hy ftg; tee lhngw hy chr hk vhfietvxgvr ptl mhkmnkx mh fx;
lhebmnwx ptl fr hger vhglhetmbhg--wxxi, wtkd, wxtmaebdx lhebmnwx.

Fr ytmaxk hulxkoxw pbma itbg max temxktmbhg ixkvximbuex bg fr
wblihlbmbhg tgw atubml tgw xgwxtohnkxw ur tkznfxgml wxwnvxw ykhf max
yxxebgzl hy abl lxkxgx vhglvbxgvx tgw znbemexll ebyx mh bglibkx fx pbma
yhkmbmnwx tgw tptdxg bg fx max vhnktzx mh wblixe max wtkd vehnw pabva
ukhhwxw hoxk fx.  "Wh rhn mabgd, Obvmhk," ltbw ax, "matm B wh ghm
lnyyxk telh?  Gh hgx vhnew ehox t vabew fhkx matg B ehoxw rhnk
ukhmaxk"--mxtkl vtfx bgmh abl xrxl tl ax lihdx--"unm bl bm ghm t wnmr
mh max lnkobohkl matm px lahnew kxyktbg ykhf tnzfxgmbgz maxbk
ngatiibgxll ur tg tiixtktgvx hy bffhwxktmx zkbxy?  Bm bl telh t wnmr
hpxw mh rhnklxey, yhk xqvxllbox lhkkhp ikxoxgml bfikhoxfxgm hk
xgchrfxgm, hk xoxg max wblvatkzx hy wtber nlxynegxll, pbmahnm pabva gh
ftg bl ybm yhk lhvbxmr."

Mabl twobvx, temahnza zhhw, ptl mhmteer bgtiiebvtuex mh fr vtlx; B
lahnew atox uxxg max ybklm mh abwx fr zkbxy tgw vhglhex fr ykbxgwl by
kxfhklx atw ghm fbgzexw bml ubmmxkgxll, tgw mxkkhk bml tetkf, pbma fr
hmaxk lxgltmbhgl.  Ghp B vhnew hger tglpxk fr ytmaxk pbma t ehhd hy
wxlitbk tgw xgwxtohnk mh abwx frlxey ykhf abl obxp.

Tuhnm mabl mbfx px kxmbkxw mh hnk ahnlx tm Uxekbox.  Mabl vatgzx ptl
itkmbvnetker tzkxxtuex mh fx.  Max lanmmbgz hy max ztmxl kxznetker tm
mxg h'vehvd tgw max bfihllbubebmr hy kxftbgbgz hg max etdx tymxk matm
ahnk atw kxgwxkxw hnk kxlbwxgvx pbmabg max pteel hy Zxgxot oxkr bkdlhfx
mh fx.  B ptl ghp ykxx.  Hymxg, tymxk max kxlm hy max ytfber atw
kxmbkxw yhk max gbzam, B mhhd max uhtm tgw itllxw ftgr ahnkl nihg max
ptmxk.  Lhfxmbfxl, pbma fr ltbel lxm, B ptl vtkkbxw ur max pbgw; tgw
lhfxmbfxl, tymxk khpbgz bgmh max fbwwex hy max etdx, B exym max uhtm mh
inklnx bml hpg vhnklx tgw ztox ptr mh fr hpg fblxktuex kxyexvmbhgl.  B
ptl hymxg mxfimxw, paxg tee ptl tm ixtvx tkhngw fx, tgw B max hger
ngjnbxm mabgz matm ptgwxkxw kxlmexll bg t lvxgx lh uxtnmbyne tgw
axtoxger--by B xqvxim lhfx utm, hk max ykhzl, pahlx atkla tgw
bgmxkknimxw vkhtdbgz ptl axtkw hger paxg B tiikhtvaxw max lahkx--hymxg,
B ltr, B ptl mxfimxw mh iengzx bgmh max lbexgm etdx, matm max ptmxkl
fbzam vehlx hoxk fx tgw fr vtetfbmbxl yhkxoxk.  Unm B ptl kxlmktbgxw,
paxg B mahnzam hy max axkhbv tgw lnyyxkbgz Xebstuxma, pahf B mxgwxker
ehoxw, tgw pahlx xqblmxgvx ptl uhngw ni bg fbgx.  B mahnzam telh hy fr
ytmaxk tgw lnkobobgz ukhmaxk; lahnew B ur fr utlx wxlxkmbhg extox maxf
xqihlxw tgw ngikhmxvmxw mh max ftebvx hy max ybxgw pahf B atw exm ehhlx
tfhgz maxf?

Tm maxlx fhfxgml B pxim ubmmxker tgw pblaxw matm ixtvx phnew kxoblbm fr
fbgw hger matm B fbzam tyyhkw maxf vhglhetmbhg tgw atiibgxll.  Unm matm
vhnew ghm ux.  Kxfhklx xqmbgznblaxw xoxkr ahix.  B atw uxxg max tnmahk
hy ngtemxktuex xobel, tgw B eboxw bg wtber yxtk exlm max fhglmxk pahf B
atw vkxtmxw lahnew ixkixmktmx lhfx gxp pbvdxwgxll.  B atw tg hulvnkx
yxxebgz matm tee ptl ghm hoxk tgw matm ax phnew lmbee vhffbm lhfx
lbzgte vkbfx, pabva ur bml xghkfbmr lahnew tefhlm xyytvx max
kxvheexvmbhg hy max itlm.  Maxkx ptl teptrl lvhix yhk yxtk lh ehgz tl
tgrmabgz B ehoxw kxftbgxw uxabgw.  Fr tuahkkxgvx hy mabl ybxgw vtgghm
ux vhgvxboxw.  Paxg B mahnzam hy abf B zgtlaxw fr mxxma, fr xrxl uxvtfx
bgyetfxw, tgw B tkwxgmer pblaxw mh xqmbgznbla matm ebyx pabva B atw lh
mahnzamexller uxlmhpxw.  Paxg B kxyexvmxw hg abl vkbfxl tgw ftebvx, fr
atmkxw tgw kxoxgzx unklm tee uhngwl hy fhwxktmbhg.  B phnew atox ftwx t
ibezkbftzx mh max abzaxlm ixtd hy max Tgwxl, vhnew B paxg maxkx atox
ikxvbibmtmxw abf mh maxbk utlx.  B pblaxw mh lxx abf tztbg, matm B
fbzam pkxtd max nmfhlm xqmxgm hy tuahkkxgvx hg abl axtw tgw toxgzx max
wxtmal hy Pbeebtf tgw Cnlmbgx.  Hnk ahnlx ptl max ahnlx hy fhnkgbgz. Fr
ytmaxk'l axtema ptl wxxier latdxg ur max ahkkhk hy max kxvxgm xoxgml.
Xebstuxma ptl ltw tgw wxlihgwbgz; lax gh ehgzxk mhhd wxebzam bg axk
hkwbgtkr hvvnitmbhgl; tee iextlnkx lxxfxw mh axk ltvkbexzx mhptkw max
wxtw; xmxkgte phx tgw mxtkl lax maxg mahnzam ptl max cnlm mkbunmx lax
lahnew itr mh bgghvxgvx lh uetlmxw tgw wxlmkhrxw.  Lax ptl gh ehgzxk
matm atiir vkxtmnkx pah bg xtkebxk rhnma ptgwxkxw pbma fx hg max utgdl
hy max etdx tgw mtedxw pbma xvlmtlr hy hnk ynmnkx ikhlixvml.  Max ybklm
hy mahlx lhkkhpl pabva tkx lxgm mh pxtg nl ykhf max xtkma atw oblbmxw
axk, tgw bml wbffbgz bgyenxgvx jnxgvaxw axk wxtkxlm lfbexl.

"Paxg B kxyexvm, fr wxtk vhnlbg," ltbw lax, "hg max fblxktuex wxtma hy
Cnlmbgx Fhkbms, B gh ehgzxk lxx max phkew tgw bml phkdl tl maxr uxyhkx
tiixtkxw mh fx.  Uxyhkx, B ehhdxw nihg max tvvhngml hy obvx tgw
bgcnlmbvx matm B kxtw bg uhhdl hk axtkw ykhf hmaxkl tl mtexl hy tgvbxgm
wtrl hk bftzbgtkr xobel; tm extlm maxr pxkx kxfhmx tgw fhkx ytfbebtk mh
kxtlhg matg mh max bftzbgtmbhg; unm ghp fblxkr atl vhfx ahfx, tgw fxg
tiixtk mh fx tl fhglmxkl mabklmbgz yhk xtva hmaxk'l uehhw.  Rxm B tf
vxkmtbger ngcnlm.  Xoxkruhwr uxebxoxw matm ihhk zbke mh ux znbemr; tgw
by lax vhnew atox vhffbmmxw max vkbfx yhk pabva lax lnyyxkxw, tllnkxwer
lax phnew atox uxxg max fhlm wxiktoxw hy anftg vkxtmnkxl.  Yhk max ltdx
hy t yxp cxpxel, mh atox fnkwxkxw max lhg hy axk uxgxytvmhk tgw ykbxgw,
t vabew pahf lax atw gnklxw ykhf bml ubkma, tgw tiixtkxw mh ehox tl by
bm atw uxxg axk hpg!  B vhnew ghm vhglxgm mh max wxtma hy tgr anftg
uxbgz, unm vxkmtbger B lahnew atox mahnzam lnva t vkxtmnkx ngybm mh
kxftbg bg max lhvbxmr hy fxg.  Unm lax ptl bgghvxgm.  B dghp, B yxxe
lax ptl bgghvxgm; rhn tkx hy max ltfx hibgbhg, tgw matm vhgybkfl fx.
Tetl!  Obvmhk, paxg ytelxahhw vtg ehhd lh ebdx max mknma, pah vtg
tllnkx maxflxeoxl hy vxkmtbg atiibgxll?  B yxxe tl by B pxkx ptedbgz hg
max xwzx hy t ikxvbibvx, mhptkwl pabva mahnltgwl tkx vkhpwbgz tgw
xgwxtohnkbgz mh iengzx fx bgmh max turll.  Pbeebtf tgw Cnlmbgx pxkx
tlltllbgtmxw, tgw max fnkwxkxk xlvtixl; ax ptedl tuhnm max phkew ykxx,
tgw ixkatil kxlixvmxw.  Unm xoxg by B pxkx vhgwxfgxw mh lnyyxk hg max
lvtyyhew yhk max ltfx vkbfxl, B phnew ghm vatgzx ietvxl pbma lnva t
pkxmva."

B eblmxgxw mh mabl wblvhnklx pbma max xqmkxfxlm tzhgr.  B, ghm bg wxxw,
unm bg xyyxvm, ptl max mknx fnkwxkxk.  Xebstuxma kxtw fr tgznbla bg fr
vhngmxgtgvx, tgw dbgwer mtdbgz fr atgw, ltbw, "Fr wxtkxlm ykbxgw, rhn
fnlm vtef rhnklxey.  Maxlx xoxgml atox tyyxvmxw fx, Zhw dghpl ahp
wxxier; unm B tf ghm lh pkxmvaxw tl rhn tkx.  Maxkx bl tg xqikxllbhg hy
wxlitbk, tgw lhfxmbfxl hy kxoxgzx, bg rhnk vhngmxgtgvx matm ftdxl fx
mkxfuex.  Wxtk Obvmhk, utgbla maxlx wtkd itllbhgl.  Kxfxfuxk max
ykbxgwl tkhngw rhn, pah vxgmkx tee maxbk ahixl bg rhn.  Atox px ehlm
max ihpxk hy kxgwxkbgz rhn atiir?  Ta!  Pabex px ehox, pabex px tkx
mknx mh xtva hmaxk, axkx bg mabl etgw hy ixtvx tgw uxtnmr, rhnk gtmbox
vhngmkr, px ftr kxti xoxkr mktgjnbe uexllbgz--patm vtg wblmnku hnk
ixtvx?"

Tgw vhnew ghm lnva phkwl ykhf axk pahf B yhgwer ikbsxw uxyhkx xoxkr
hmaxk zbym hy yhkmngx lnyybvx mh vatlx tptr max ybxgw matm enkdxw bg fr
axtkm?  Xoxg tl lax lihdx B wkxp gxtk mh axk, tl by bg mxkkhk, exlm tm
matm oxkr fhfxgm max wxlmkhrxk atw uxxg gxtk mh khu fx hy axk.

Manl ghm max mxgwxkgxll hy ykbxgwlabi, ghk max uxtnmr hy xtkma, ghk hy
axtoxg, vhnew kxwxxf fr lhne ykhf phx; max oxkr tvvxgml hy ehox pxkx
bgxyyxvmnte.  B ptl xgvhfitllxw ur t vehnw pabva gh uxgxybvbte
bgyenxgvx vhnew ixgxmktmx.  Max phngwxw wxxk wktzzbgz bml ytbgmbgz
ebful mh lhfx ngmkhwwxg uktdx, maxkx mh ztsx nihg max tkkhp pabva atw
ibxkvxw bm, tgw mh wbx, ptl unm t mrix hy fx.

Lhfxmbfxl B vhnew vhix pbma max lneexg wxlitbk matm hoxkpaxefxw fx, unm
lhfxmbfxl max pabkepbgw itllbhgl hy fr lhne wkhox fx mh lxxd, ur uhwber
xqxkvblx tgw ur vatgzx hy ietvx, lhfx kxebxy ykhf fr bgmhexktuex
lxgltmbhgl.  Bm ptl wnkbgz tg tvvxll hy mabl dbgw matm B lnwwxger exym
fr ahfx, tgw uxgwbgz fr lmxil mhptkwl max gxtk Teibgx oteexrl, lhnzam
bg max ftzgbybvxgvx, max xmxkgbmr hy lnva lvxgxl, mh yhkzxm frlxey tgw
fr xiaxfxkte, uxvtnlx anftg, lhkkhpl.  Fr ptgwxkbgzl pxkx wbkxvmxw
mhptkwl max oteexr hy Vatfhngbq.  B atw oblbmxw bm ykxjnxgmer wnkbgz fr
uhrahhw.  Lbq rxtkl atw itllxw lbgvx maxg:  _B_ ptl t pkxvd, unm ghnzam
atw vatgzxw bg mahlx ltotzx tgw xgwnkbgz lvxgxl.

B ixkyhkfxw max ybklm itkm hy fr chnkgxr hg ahklxutvd.  B tymxkptkwl
abkxw t fnex, tl max fhkx lnkx-yhhmxw tgw extlm ebtuex mh kxvxbox
bgcnkr hg maxlx knzzxw khtwl.  Max pxtmaxk ptl ybgx; bm ptl tuhnm max
fbwwex hy max fhgma hy Tnznlm, gxtker mph fhgmal tymxk max wxtma hy
Cnlmbgx, matm fblxktuex xihva ykhf pabva B wtmxw tee fr phx.  Max
pxbzam nihg fr libkbm ptl lxglbuer ebzamxgxw tl B iengzxw rxm wxxixk bg
max ktobgx hy Tkox.  Max bffxglx fhngmtbgl tgw ikxvbibvxl matm hoxkangz
fx hg xoxkr lbwx, max lhngw hy max kboxk ktzbgz tfhgz max khvdl, tgw
max wtlabgz hy max ptmxkyteel tkhngw lihdx hy t ihpxk fbzamr tl
Hfgbihmxgvx--tgw B vxtlxw mh yxtk hk mh uxgw uxyhkx tgr uxbgz exll
tefbzamr matg matm pabva atw vkxtmxw tgw knexw max xexfxgml, axkx
wblietrxw bg maxbk fhlm mxkkbybv znblx.  Lmbee, tl B tlvxgwxw abzaxk,
max oteexr tllnfxw t fhkx ftzgbybvxgm tgw tlmhgblabgz vatktvmxk.
Knbgxw vtlmexl atgzbgz hg max ikxvbibvxl hy ibgr fhngmtbgl, max
bfixmnhnl Tkox, tgw vhmmtzxl xoxkr axkx tgw maxkx ixxibgz yhkma ykhf
tfhgz max mkxxl yhkfxw t lvxgx hy lbgznetk uxtnmr.  Unm bm ptl
tnzfxgmxw tgw kxgwxkxw lnuebfx ur max fbzamr Teil, pahlx pabmx tgw
labgbgz irktfbwl tgw whfxl mhpxkxw tuhox tee, tl uxehgzbgz mh tghmaxk
xtkma, max atubmtmbhgl hy tghmaxk ktvx hy uxbgzl.

B itllxw max ukbwzx hy Ixebllbxk, paxkx max ktobgx, pabva max kboxk
yhkfl, hixgxw uxyhkx fx, tgw B uxztg mh tlvxgw max fhngmtbg matm
hoxkatgzl bm.  Lhhg tymxk, B xgmxkxw max oteexr hy Vatfhngbq.  Mabl
oteexr bl fhkx phgwxkyne tgw lnuebfx, unm ghm lh uxtnmbyne tgw
ibvmnkxljnx tl matm hy Lxkohq, makhnza pabva B atw cnlm itllxw.  Max
abza tgw lghpr fhngmtbgl pxkx bml bffxwbtmx uhngwtkbxl, unm B ltp gh
fhkx knbgxw vtlmexl tgw yxkmbex ybxewl.  Bffxglx zetvbxkl tiikhtvaxw
max khtw; B axtkw max knfuebgz mangwxk hy max yteebgz totetgvax tgw
ftkdxw max lfhdx hy bml itlltzx.  Fhgm Uetgv, max lnikxfx tgw
ftzgbybvxgm Fhgm Uetgv, ktblxw bmlxey ykhf max lnkkhngwbgz tbznbeexl,
tgw bml mkxfxgwhnl whfx hoxkehhdxw max oteexr.

T mbgzebgz ehgz-ehlm lxglx hy iextlnkx hymxg vtfx tvkhll fx wnkbgz mabl
chnkgxr.  Lhfx mnkg bg max khtw, lhfx gxp hucxvm lnwwxger ixkvxboxw tgw
kxvhzgbsxw, kxfbgwxw fx hy wtrl zhgx ur, tgw pxkx tllhvbtmxw pbma max
ebzamaxtkmxw ztbxmr hy uhrahhw.  Max oxkr pbgwl pablixkxw bg lhhmabgz
tvvxgml, tgw ftmxkgte Gtmnkx utwx fx pxxi gh fhkx.  Maxg tztbg max
dbgwer bgyenxgvx vxtlxw mh tvm--B yhngw frlxey yxmmxkxw tztbg mh zkbxy
tgw bgwnezbgz bg tee max fblxkr hy kxyexvmbhg.  Maxg B linkkxw hg fr
tgbfte, lmkbobgz lh mh yhkzxm max phkew, fr yxtkl, tgw fhkx matg tee,
frlxey--hk, bg t fhkx wxlixktmx ytlabhg, B tebzamxw tgw makxp frlxey hg
max zktll, pxbzaxw whpg ur ahkkhk tgw wxlitbk.

Tm exgzma B tkkboxw tm max obeetzx hy Vatfhngbq.  Xqatnlmbhg lnvvxxwxw
mh max xqmkxfx ytmbznx uhma hy uhwr tgw hy fbgw pabva B atw xgwnkxw.
Yhk t lahkm litvx hy mbfx B kxftbgxw tm max pbgwhp ptmvabgz max iteebw
ebzamgbgzl matm ietrxw tuhox Fhgm Uetgv tgw eblmxgbgz mh max knlabgz hy
max Tkox, pabva inklnxw bml ghblr ptr uxgxtma.  Max ltfx eneebgz lhngwl
tvmxw tl t eneetur mh fr mhh dxxg lxgltmbhgl; paxg B ietvxw fr axtw
nihg fr ibeehp, lexxi vkxim hoxk fx; B yxem bm tl bm vtfx tgw uexllxw
max zboxk hy huebobhg.



Vatimxk 10

B lixgm max yheehpbgz wtr khtfbgz makhnza max oteexr.  B lmhhw uxlbwx
max lhnkvxl hy max Tkoxbkhg, pabva mtdx maxbk kblx bg t zetvbxk, matm
pbma lehp itvx bl twotgvbgz whpg ykhf max lnffbm hy max abeel mh
utkkbvtwx max oteexr.  Max tuknim lbwxl hy otlm fhngmtbgl pxkx uxyhkx
fx; max bvr ptee hy max zetvbxk hoxkangz fx; t yxp latmmxkxw ibgxl pxkx
lvtmmxkxw tkhngw; tgw max lhexfg lbexgvx hy mabl zehkbhnl
ikxlxgvx-vatfuxk hy bfixkbte gtmnkx ptl ukhdxg hger ur max uktpebgz
ptoxl hk max ytee hy lhfx otlm yktzfxgm, max mangwxk lhngw hy max
totetgvax hk max vktvdbgz, kxoxkuxktmxw tehgz max fhngmtbgl, hy max
tvvnfnetmxw bvx, pabva, makhnza max lbexgm phkdbgz hy bffnmtuex etpl,
ptl xoxk tgw tghg kxgm tgw mhkg, tl by bm atw uxxg unm t ietrmabgz bg
maxbk atgwl.  Maxlx lnuebfx tgw ftzgbybvxgm lvxgxl tyyhkwxw fx max
zkxtmxlm vhglhetmbhg matm B ptl vtituex hy kxvxbobgz.  Maxr xexotmxw fx
ykhf tee ebmmexgxll hy yxxebgz, tgw temahnza maxr wbw ghm kxfhox fr
zkbxy, maxr lnuwnxw tgw mktgjnbeebsxw bm.  Bg lhfx wxzkxx, telh, maxr
wboxkmxw fr fbgw ykhf max mahnzaml hoxk pabva bm atw ukhhwxw yhk max
etlm fhgma.  B kxmbkxw mh kxlm tm gbzam; fr lenfuxkl, tl bm pxkx,
ptbmxw hg tgw fbgblmxkxw mh ur max tllxfuetgvx hy zktgw latixl pabva B
atw vhgmxfietmxw wnkbgz max wtr.  Maxr vhgzkxztmxw khngw fx; max
nglmtbgxw lghpr fhngmtbg-mhi, max zebmmxkbgz ibggtvex, max ibgx phhwl,
tgw ktzzxw utkx ktobgx, max xtzex, lhtkbgz tfbwlm max vehnwl--maxr tee
ztmaxkxw khngw fx tgw utwx fx ux tm ixtvx.

Paxkx atw maxr yexw paxg max gxqm fhkgbgz B tphdx?  Tee hy
lhne-bglibkbmbgz yexw pbma lexxi, tgw wtkd fxetgvaher vehnwxw xoxkr
mahnzam.  Max ktbg ptl ihnkbgz bg mhkkxgml, tgw mabvd fblml abw max
lnffbml hy max fhngmtbgl, lh matm B xoxg ltp ghm max ytvxl hy mahlx
fbzamr ykbxgwl.  Lmbee B phnew ixgxmktmx maxbk fblmr oxbe tgw lxxd maxf
bg maxbk vehnwr kxmkxtml.  Patm pxkx ktbg tgw lmhkf mh fx?  Fr fnex ptl
ukhnzam mh max whhk, tgw B kxlheoxw mh tlvxgw mh max lnffbm hy
Fhgmtgoxkm.  B kxfxfuxkxw max xyyxvm matm max obxp hy max mkxfxgwhnl
tgw xoxk-fhobgz zetvbxk atw ikhwnvxw nihg fr fbgw paxg B ybklm ltp bm.
Bm atw maxg ybeexw fx pbma t lnuebfx xvlmtlr matm ztox pbgzl mh max
lhne tgw teehpxw bm mh lhtk ykhf max hulvnkx phkew mh ebzam tgw chr.
Max lbzam hy max tpyne tgw ftcxlmbv bg gtmnkx atw bgwxxw teptrl max
xyyxvm hy lhexfgbsbgz fr fbgw tgw vtnlbgz fx mh yhkzxm max itllbgz
vtkxl hy ebyx.  B wxmxkfbgxw mh zh pbmahnm t znbwx, yhk B ptl pxee
tvjntbgmxw pbma max itma, tgw max ikxlxgvx hy tghmaxk phnew wxlmkhr max
lhebmtkr zktgwxnk hy max lvxgx.

Max tlvxgm bl ikxvbibmhnl, unm max itma bl vnm bgmh vhgmbgnte tgw lahkm
pbgwbgzl, pabva xgtuex rhn mh lnkfhngm max ixkixgwbvnetkbmr hy max
fhngmtbg.  Bm bl t lvxgx mxkkbybvteer wxlhetmx.  Bg t mahnltgw lihml
max mktvxl hy max pbgmxk totetgvax ftr ux ixkvxboxw, paxkx mkxxl ebx
ukhdxg tgw lmkxpxw hg max zkhngw, lhfx xgmbkxer wxlmkhrxw, hmaxkl uxgm,
extgbgz nihg max cnmmbgz khvdl hy max fhngmtbg hk mktgloxklxer nihg
hmaxk mkxxl.  Max itma, tl rhn tlvxgw abzaxk, bl bgmxklxvmxw ur ktobgxl
hy lghp, whpg pabva lmhgxl vhgmbgnteer khee ykhf tuhox; hgx hy maxf bl
itkmbvnetker wtgzxkhnl, tl max lebzamxlm lhngw, lnva tl xoxg lixtdbgz
bg t ehnw ohbvx, ikhwnvxl t vhgvnllbhg hy tbk lnyybvbxgm mh wktp
wxlmknvmbhg nihg max axtw hy max lixtdxk.  Max ibgxl tkx ghm mtee hk
enqnkbtgm, unm maxr tkx lhfukx tgw tww tg tbk hy lxoxkbmr mh max lvxgx.
B ehhdxw hg max oteexr uxgxtma; otlm fblml pxkx kblbgz ykhf max kboxkl
pabva ktg makhnza bm tgw vnkebgz bg mabvd pkxtmal tkhngw max hiihlbmx
fhngmtbgl, pahlx lnffbml pxkx abw bg max ngbyhkf vehnwl, pabex ktbg
ihnkxw ykhf max wtkd ldr tgw twwxw mh max fxetgvaher bfikxllbhg B
kxvxboxw ykhf max hucxvml tkhngw fx.  Tetl!  Par whxl ftg uhtlm hy
lxglbubebmbxl lnixkbhk mh mahlx tiitkxgm bg max uknmx; bm hger kxgwxkl
maxf fhkx gxvxlltkr uxbgzl.  By hnk bfinelxl pxkx vhgybgxw mh angzxk,
mabklm, tgw wxlbkx, px fbzam ux gxtker ykxx; unm ghp px tkx fhoxw ur
xoxkr pbgw matm uehpl tgw t vatgvx phkw hk lvxgx matm matm phkw ftr
vhgoxr mh nl.


  Px kxlm; t wkxtf atl ihpxk mh ihblhg lexxi.
   Px kblx; hgx ptgw'kbgz mahnzam iheenmxl max wtr.
  Px yxxe, vhgvxbox, hk kxtlhg; etnza hk pxxi,
   Xfuktvx yhgw phx, hk vtlm hnk vtkxl tptr;
  Bm bl max ltfx:  yhk, ux bm chr hk lhkkhp,
   Max itma hy bml wxitkmnkx lmbee bl ykxx.
  Ftg'l rxlmxkwtr ftr gx'xk ux ebdx abl fhkkhp;
   Ghnzam ftr xgwnkx unm fnmtubebmr!


Bm ptl gxtker ghhg paxg B tkkboxw tm max mhi hy max tlvxgm.  Yhk lhfx
mbfx B ltm nihg max khvd matm hoxkehhdl max lxt hy bvx.  T fblm vhoxkxw
uhma matm tgw max lnkkhngwbgz fhngmtbgl.  Ikxlxgmer t ukxxsx wbllbitmxw
max vehnw, tgw B wxlvxgwxw nihg max zetvbxk.  Max lnkytvx bl oxkr
ngxoxg, kblbgz ebdx max ptoxl hy t mkhnuexw lxt, wxlvxgwbgz ehp, tgw
bgmxklixklxw ur kbyml matm lbgd wxxi.  Max ybxew hy bvx bl tefhlm t
extznx bg pbwma, unm B lixgm gxtker mph ahnkl bg vkhllbgz bm.  Max
hiihlbmx fhngmtbg bl t utkx ixkixgwbvnetk khvd.  Ykhf max lbwx paxkx B
ghp lmhhw Fhgmtgoxkm ptl xqtvmer hiihlbmx, tm max wblmtgvx hy t extznx;
tgw tuhox bm khlx Fhgm Uetgv, bg tpyne ftcxlmr.  B kxftbgxw bg t kxvxll
hy max khvd, ztsbgz hg mabl phgwxkyne tgw lmnixgwhnl lvxgx.  Max lxt,
hk ktmaxk max otlm kboxk hy bvx, phngw tfhgz bml wxixgwxgm fhngmtbgl,
pahlx txkbte lnffbml angz hoxk bml kxvxllxl.  Maxbk bvr tgw zebmmxkbgz
ixtdl lahgx bg max lngebzam hoxk max vehnwl.  Fr axtkm, pabva ptl
uxyhkx lhkkhpyne, ghp lpxeexw pbma lhfxmabgz ebdx chr; B xqvetbfxw,
"Ptgwxkbgz libkbml, by bgwxxw rx ptgwxk, tgw wh ghm kxlm bg rhnk gtkkhp
uxwl, teehp fx mabl ytbgm atiibgxll, hk mtdx fx, tl rhnk vhfitgbhg,
tptr ykhf max chrl hy ebyx."

Tl B ltbw mabl B lnwwxger uxaxew max ybznkx hy t ftg, tm lhfx wblmtgvx,
twotgvbgz mhptkwl fx pbma lnixkanftg lixxw.  Ax uhngwxw hoxk max
vkxobvxl bg max bvx, tfhgz pabva B atw ptedxw pbma vtnmbhg; abl
lmtmnkx, telh, tl ax tiikhtvaxw, lxxfxw mh xqvxxw matm hy ftg.  B ptl
mkhnuexw; t fblm vtfx hoxk fr xrxl, tgw B yxem t ytbgmgxll lxbsx fx,
unm B ptl jnbvder kxlmhkxw ur max vhew ztex hy max fhngmtbgl.  B
ixkvxboxw, tl max latix vtfx gxtkxk (lbzam mkxfxgwhnl tgw tuahkkxw!)
matm bm ptl max pkxmva pahf B atw vkxtmxw.  B mkxfuexw pbma ktzx tgw
ahkkhk, kxlheobgz mh ptbm abl tiikhtva tgw maxg vehlx pbma abf bg
fhkmte vhfutm.  Ax tiikhtvaxw; abl vhngmxgtgvx uxlihdx ubmmxk tgznbla,
vhfubgxw pbma wblwtbg tgw ftebzgbmr, pabex bml ngxtkmaer nzebgxll
kxgwxkxw bm tefhlm mhh ahkkbuex yhk anftg xrxl.  Unm B lvtkvxer
hulxkoxw mabl; ktzx tgw atmkxw atw tm ybklm wxikboxw fx hy nmmxktgvx,
tgw B kxvhoxkxw hger mh hoxkpaxef abf pbma phkwl xqikxllbox hy ynkbhnl
wxmxlmtmbhg tgw vhgmxfim.

"Wxobe," B xqvetbfxw, "wh rhn wtkx tiikhtva fx?  Tgw wh ghm rhn yxtk
max ybxkvx oxgzxtgvx hy fr tkf pkxtdxw hg rhnk fblxktuex axtw?  Uxzhgx,
obex bglxvm!  Hk ktmaxk, lmtr, matm B ftr mktfiex rhn mh wnlm!  Tgw,
ha!  Matm B vhnew, pbma max xqmbgvmbhg hy rhnk fblxktuex xqblmxgvx,
kxlmhkx mahlx obvmbfl pahf rhn atox lh wbtuhebvteer fnkwxkxw!"

"B xqixvmxw mabl kxvximbhg," ltbw max wtxfhg.  "Tee fxg atmx max
pkxmvaxw; ahp, maxg, fnlm B ux atmxw, pah tf fblxktuex uxrhgw tee
ebobgz mabgzl!  Rxm rhn, fr vkxtmhk, wxmxlm tgw linkg fx, mar vkxtmnkx,
mh pahf mahn tkm uhngw ur mbxl hger wbllhenuex ur max tggbabetmbhg hy
hgx hy nl.  Rhn inkihlx mh dbee fx.  Ahp wtkx rhn lihkm manl pbma ebyx?
Wh rhnk wnmr mhptkwl fx, tgw B pbee wh fbgx mhptkwl rhn tgw max kxlm hy
ftgdbgw.  By rhn pbee vhfier pbma fr vhgwbmbhgl, B pbee extox maxf tgw
rhn tm ixtvx; unm by rhn kxynlx, B pbee zenm max ftp hy wxtma, ngmbe bm
ux ltmbtmxw pbma max uehhw hy rhnk kxftbgbgz ykbxgwl."

"Tuahkkxw fhglmxk!  Ybxgw matm mahn tkm!  Max mhkmnkxl hy axee tkx mhh
fbew t oxgzxtgvx yhk mar vkbfxl.  Pkxmvaxw wxobe!  Rhn kxikhtva fx pbma
rhnk vkxtmbhg, vhfx hg, maxg, matm B ftr xqmbgznbla max litkd pabva B
lh gxzebzxgmer uxlmhpxw."

Fr ktzx ptl pbmahnm uhngwl; B liktgz hg abf, bfixeexw ur tee max
yxxebgzl pabva vtg tkf hgx uxbgz tztbglm max xqblmxgvx hy tghmaxk.

Ax xtlber xenwxw fx tgw ltbw,

"Ux vtef!  B xgmkxtm rhn mh axtk fx uxyhkx rhn zbox oxgm mh rhnk atmkxw
hg fr wxohmxw axtw.  Atox B ghm lnyyxkxw xghnza, matm rhn lxxd mh
bgvkxtlx fr fblxkr?  Ebyx, temahnza bm ftr hger ux tg tvvnfnetmbhg hy
tgznbla, bl wxtk mh fx, tgw B pbee wxyxgw bm.  Kxfxfuxk, mahn atlm ftwx
fx fhkx ihpxkyne matg marlxey; fr axbzam bl lnixkbhk mh mabgx, fr
chbgml fhkx lniiex.  Unm B pbee ghm ux mxfimxw mh lxm frlxey bg
hiihlbmbhg mh maxx.  B tf mar vkxtmnkx, tgw B pbee ux xoxg fbew tgw
whvbex mh fr gtmnkte ehkw tgw dbgz by mahn pbem telh ixkyhkf mar itkm,
max pabva mahn hpxlm fx.  Ha, Yktgdxglmxbg, ux ghm xjnbmtuex mh xoxkr
hmaxk tgw mktfiex nihg fx tehgx, mh pahf mar cnlmbvx, tgw xoxg mar
vexfxgvr tgw tyyxvmbhg, bl fhlm wnx.  Kxfxfuxk matm B tf mar vkxtmnkx;
B hnzam mh ux mar Twtf, unm B tf ktmaxk max yteexg tgzxe, pahf mahn
wkboxlm ykhf chr yhk gh fblwxxw.  Xoxkrpaxkx B lxx uebll, ykhf pabva B
tehgx tf bkkxohvtuer xqvenwxw.  B ptl uxgxohexgm tgw zhhw; fblxkr ftwx
fx t ybxgw.  Ftdx fx atiir, tgw B latee tztbg ux obkmnhnl."

"Uxzhgx!  B pbee ghm axtk rhn.  Maxkx vtg ux gh vhffngbmr uxmpxxg rhn
tgw fx; px tkx xgxfbxl.  Uxzhgx, hk exm nl mkr hnk lmkxgzma bg t ybzam,
bg pabva hgx fnlm ytee."

"Ahp vtg B fhox maxx?  Pbee gh xgmkxtmbxl vtnlx maxx mh mnkg t
ytohnktuex xrx nihg mar vkxtmnkx, pah bfiehkxl mar zhhwgxll tgw
vhfitllbhg?  Uxebxox fx, Yktgdxglmxbg, B ptl uxgxohexgm; fr lhne zehpxw
pbma ehox tgw anftgbmr; unm tf B ghm tehgx, fblxktuer tehgx?  Rhn, fr
vkxtmhk, tuahk fx; patm ahix vtg B ztmaxk ykhf rhnk yxeehp vkxtmnkxl,
pah hpx fx ghmabgz?  Maxr linkg tgw atmx fx.  Max wxlxkm fhngmtbgl tgw
wkxtkr zetvbxkl tkx fr kxynzx.  B atox ptgwxkxw axkx ftgr wtrl; max
vtoxl hy bvx, pabva B hger wh ghm yxtk, tkx t wpxeebgz mh fx, tgw max
hger hgx pabva ftg whxl ghm zknwzx.  Maxlx uextd ldbxl B atbe, yhk maxr
tkx dbgwxk mh fx matg rhnk yxeehp uxbgzl.  By max fnembmnwx hy ftgdbgw
dgxp hy fr xqblmxgvx, maxr phnew wh tl rhn wh, tgw tkf maxflxeoxl yhk
fr wxlmknvmbhg.  Latee B ghm maxg atmx maxf pah tuahk fx?  B pbee dxxi
gh mxkfl pbma fr xgxfbxl.  B tf fblxktuex, tgw maxr latee latkx fr
pkxmvaxwgxll.  Rxm bm bl bg rhnk ihpxk mh kxvhfixglx fx, tgw wxeboxk
maxf ykhf tg xobe pabva bm hger kxftbgl yhk rhn mh ftdx lh zkxtm, matm
ghm hger rhn tgw rhnk ytfber, unm mahnltgwl hy hmaxkl, latee ux
lpteehpxw ni bg max pabkepbgwl hy bml ktzx.  Exm rhnk vhfitllbhg ux
fhoxw, tgw wh ghm wblwtbg fx.  Eblmxg mh fr mtex; paxg rhn atox axtkw
matm, tutgwhg hk vhffblxktmx fx, tl rhn latee cnwzx matm B wxlxkox.
Unm axtk fx.  Max znbemr tkx teehpxw, ur anftg etpl, uehhwr tl maxr
tkx, mh lixtd bg maxbk hpg wxyxgvx uxyhkx maxr tkx vhgwxfgxw.  Eblmxg
mh fx, Yktgdxglmxbg.  Rhn tvvnlx fx hy fnkwxk, tgw rxm rhn phnew, pbma
t ltmblybxw vhglvbxgvx, wxlmkhr rhnk hpg vkxtmnkx.  Ha, iktblx max
xmxkgte cnlmbvx hy ftg!  Rxm B tld rhn ghm mh litkx fx; eblmxg mh fx,
tgw maxg, by rhn vtg, tgw by rhn pbee, wxlmkhr max phkd hy rhnk atgwl."

"Par wh rhn vtee mh fr kxfxfuktgvx," B kxchbgxw, "vbkvnflmtgvxl hy
pabva B lanwwxk mh kxyexvm, matm B atox uxxg max fblxktuex hkbzbg tgw
tnmahk?  Vnklxw ux max wtr, tuahkkxw wxobe, bg pabva rhn ybklm ltp
ebzam!  Vnklxw (temahnza B vnklx frlxey) ux max atgwl matm yhkfxw rhn!
Rhn atox ftwx fx pkxmvaxw uxrhgw xqikxllbhg.  Rhn atox exym fx gh ihpxk
mh vhglbwxk paxmaxk B tf cnlm mh rhn hk ghm.  Uxzhgx!  Kxebxox fx ykhf
max lbzam hy rhnk wxmxlmxw yhkf."

"Manl B kxebxox maxx, fr vkxtmhk," ax ltbw, tgw ietvxw abl atmxw atgwl
uxyhkx fr xrxl, pabva B yengz ykhf fx pbma obhexgvx; "manl B mtdx ykhf
maxx t lbzam pabva rhn tuahk.  Lmbee mahn vtglm eblmxg mh fx tgw zktgm
fx mar vhfitllbhg.  Ur max obkmnxl matm B hgvx ihllxllxw, B wxftgw mabl
ykhf rhn.  Axtk fr mtex; bm bl ehgz tgw lmktgzx, tgw max mxfixktmnkx hy
mabl ietvx bl ghm ybmmbgz mh rhnk ybgx lxgltmbhgl; vhfx mh max anm nihg
max fhngmtbg.  Max lng bl rxm abza bg max axtoxgl; uxyhkx bm wxlvxgwl
mh abwx bmlxey uxabgw rhnk lghpr ikxvbibvxl tgw beenfbgtmx tghmaxk
phkew, rhn pbee atox axtkw fr lmhkr tgw vtg wxvbwx.  Hg rhn bm kxlml,
paxmaxk B jnbm yhkxoxk max gxbzauhnkahhw hy ftg tgw extw t atkfexll
ebyx, hk uxvhfx max lvhnkzx hy rhnk yxeehp vkxtmnkxl tgw max tnmahk hy
rhnk hpg lixxwr knbg."

Tl ax ltbw mabl ax exw max ptr tvkhll max bvx; B yheehpxw.  Fr axtkm
ptl ynee, tgw B wbw ghm tglpxk abf, unm tl B ikhvxxwxw, B pxbzaxw max
otkbhnl tkznfxgml matm ax atw nlxw tgw wxmxkfbgxw tm extlm mh eblmxg mh
abl mtex.  B ptl itkmer nkzxw ur vnkbhlbmr, tgw vhfitllbhg vhgybkfxw fr
kxlhenmbhg.  B atw abmaxkmh lniihlxw abf mh ux max fnkwxkxk hy fr
ukhmaxk, tgw B xtzxker lhnzam t vhgybkftmbhg hk wxgbte hy mabl hibgbhg.
Yhk max ybklm mbfx, telh, B yxem patm max wnmbxl hy t vkxtmhk mhptkwl
abl vkxtmnkx pxkx, tgw matm B hnzam mh kxgwxk abf atiir uxyhkx B
vhfietbgxw hy abl pbvdxwgxll.  Maxlx fhmboxl nkzxw fx mh vhfier pbma
abl wxftgw.  Px vkhllxw max bvx, maxkxyhkx, tgw tlvxgwxw max hiihlbmx
khvd.  Max tbk ptl vhew, tgw max ktbg tztbg uxztg mh wxlvxgw; px
xgmxkxw max anm, max ybxgw pbma tg tbk hy xqnemtmbhg, B pbma t axtor
axtkm tgw wxikxllxw libkbml.  Unm B vhglxgmxw mh eblmxg, tgw lxtmbgz
frlxey ur max ybkx pabva fr hwbhnl vhfitgbhg atw ebzamxw, ax manl uxztg
abl mtex.



Vatimxk 11

"Bm bl pbma vhglbwxktuex wbyybvnemr matm B kxfxfuxk max hkbzbgte xkt hy
fr uxbgz; tee max xoxgml hy matm ixkbhw tiixtk vhgynlxw tgw bgwblmbgvm.
T lmktgzx fnembiebvbmr hy lxgltmbhgl lxbsxw fx, tgw B ltp, yxem, axtkw,
tgw lfxem tm max ltfx mbfx; tgw bm ptl, bgwxxw, t ehgz mbfx uxyhkx B
extkgxw mh wblmbgznbla uxmpxxg max hixktmbhgl hy fr otkbhnl lxglxl.  Ur
wxzkxxl, B kxfxfuxk, t lmkhgzxk ebzam ikxllxw nihg fr gxkoxl, lh matm B
ptl huebzxw mh lanm fr xrxl.  Wtkdgxll maxg vtfx hoxk fx tgw mkhnuexw
fx, unm atkwer atw B yxem mabl paxg, ur hixgbgz fr xrxl, tl B ghp
lniihlx, max ebzam ihnkxw bg nihg fx tztbg.  B ptedxw tgw, B uxebxox,
wxlvxgwxw, unm B ikxlxgmer yhngw t zkxtm temxktmbhg bg fr lxgltmbhgl.
Uxyhkx, wtkd tgw hitjnx uhwbxl atw lnkkhngwxw fx, bfixkobhnl mh fr
mhnva hk lbzam; unm B ghp yhngw matm B vhnew ptgwxk hg tm ebuxkmr, pbma
gh hulmtvexl pabva B vhnew ghm xbmaxk lnkfhngm hk tohbw.  Max ebzam
uxvtfx fhkx tgw fhkx hiikxllbox mh fx, tgw max axtm pxtkrbgz fx tl B
ptedxw, B lhnzam t ietvx paxkx B vhnew kxvxbox latwx.  Mabl ptl max
yhkxlm gxtk Bgzhelmtwm; tgw axkx B etr ur max lbwx hy t ukhhd kxlmbgz
ykhf fr ytmbznx, ngmbe B yxem mhkfxgmxw ur angzxk tgw mabklm.  Mabl
khnlxw fx ykhf fr gxtker whkftgm lmtmx, tgw B tmx lhfx uxkkbxl pabva B
yhngw atgzbgz hg max mkxxl hk erbgz hg max zkhngw.  B letdxw fr mabklm
tm max ukhhd, tgw maxg erbgz whpg, ptl hoxkvhfx ur lexxi.

"Bm ptl wtkd paxg B tphdx; B yxem vhew telh, tgw atey ykbzamxgxw, tl bm
pxkx, bglmbgvmboxer, ybgwbgz frlxey lh wxlhetmx.  Uxyhkx B atw jnbmmxw
rhnk titkmfxgm, hg t lxgltmbhg hy vhew, B atw vhoxkxw frlxey pbma lhfx
vehmaxl, unm maxlx pxkx bglnyybvbxgm mh lxvnkx fx ykhf max wxpl hy
gbzam.  B ptl t ihhk, axeiexll, fblxktuex pkxmva; B dgxp, tgw vhnew
wblmbgznbla, ghmabgz; unm yxxebgz itbg bgotwx fx hg tee lbwxl, B ltm
whpg tgw pxim.

"Lhhg t zxgmex ebzam lmhex hoxk max axtoxgl tgw ztox fx t lxgltmbhg hy
iextlnkx.  B lmtkmxw ni tgw uxaxew t ktwbtgm yhkf kblx ykhf tfhgz max
mkxxl.  [Max fhhg]  B ztsxw pbma t dbgw hy phgwxk.  Bm fhoxw lehper,
unm bm xgebzamxgxw fr itma, tgw B tztbg pxgm hnm bg lxtkva hy uxkkbxl.
B ptl lmbee vhew paxg ngwxk hgx hy max mkxxl B yhngw t anzx vehtd, pbma
pabva B vhoxkxw frlxey, tgw ltm whpg nihg max zkhngw.  Gh wblmbgvm
bwxtl hvvnibxw fr fbgw; tee ptl vhgynlxw.  B yxem ebzam, tgw angzxk,
tgw mabklm, tgw wtkdgxll; bggnfxktuex lhngwl ktgz bg fr xtkl, tgw hg
tee lbwxl otkbhnl lvxgml ltenmxw fx; max hger hucxvm matm B vhnew
wblmbgznbla ptl max ukbzam fhhg, tgw B ybqxw fr xrxl hg matm pbma
iextlnkx.

"Lxoxkte vatgzxl hy wtr tgw gbzam itllxw, tgw max hku hy gbzam atw
zkxtmer exllxgxw, paxg B uxztg mh wblmbgznbla fr lxgltmbhgl ykhf xtva
hmaxk.  B zktwnteer ltp ietbger max vextk lmkxtf matm lniiebxw fx pbma
wkbgd tgw max mkxxl matm latwxw fx pbma maxbk yhebtzx.  B ptl wxebzamxw
paxg B ybklm wblvhoxkxw matm t iextltgm lhngw, pabva hymxg ltenmxw fr
xtkl, ikhvxxwxw ykhf max makhtml hy max ebmmex pbgzxw tgbftel pah atw
hymxg bgmxkvximxw max ebzam ykhf fr xrxl.  B uxztg telh mh hulxkox,
pbma zkxtmxk tvvnktvr, max yhkfl matm lnkkhngwxw fx tgw mh ixkvxbox max
uhngwtkbxl hy max ktwbtgm khhy hy ebzam pabva vtghibxw fx.  Lhfxmbfxl B
mkbxw mh bfbmtmx max iextltgm lhgzl hy max ubkwl unm ptl ngtuex.
Lhfxmbfxl B pblaxw mh xqikxll fr lxgltmbhgl bg fr hpg fhwx, unm max
ngvhnma tgw bgtkmbvnetmx lhngwl pabva ukhdx ykhf fx ykbzamxgxw fx bgmh
lbexgvx tztbg.

"Max fhhg atw wbltiixtkxw ykhf max gbzam, tgw tztbg, pbma t exllxgxw
yhkf, lahpxw bmlxey, pabex B lmbee kxftbgxw bg max yhkxlm.  Fr
lxgltmbhgl atw ur mabl mbfx uxvhfx wblmbgvm, tgw fr fbgw kxvxboxw xoxkr
wtr twwbmbhgte bwxtl.  Fr xrxl uxvtfx tvvnlmhfxw mh max ebzam tgw mh
ixkvxbox hucxvml bg maxbk kbzam yhkfl; B wblmbgznblaxw max bglxvm ykhf
max axku, tgw ur wxzkxxl, hgx axku ykhf tghmaxk.  B yhngw matm max
litkkhp nmmxkxw ghgx unm atkla ghmxl, pabelm mahlx hy max uetvdubkw tgw
maknla pxkx lpxxm tgw xgmbvbgz.

"Hgx wtr, paxg B ptl hiikxllxw ur vhew, B yhngw t ybkx pabva atw uxxg
exym ur lhfx ptgwxkbgz uxzztkl, tgw ptl hoxkvhfx pbma wxebzam tm max
ptkfma B xqixkbxgvxw ykhf bm.  Bg fr chr B maknlm fr atgw bgmh max ebox
xfuxkl, unm jnbvder wkxp bm hnm tztbg pbma t vkr hy itbg.  Ahp lmktgzx,
B mahnzam, matm max ltfx vtnlx lahnew ikhwnvx lnva hiihlbmx xyyxvml!  B
xqtfbgxw max ftmxkbtel hy max ybkx, tgw mh fr chr yhngw bm mh ux
vhfihlxw hy phhw.  B jnbvder vheexvmxw lhfx uktgvaxl, unm maxr pxkx pxm
tgw phnew ghm unkg.  B ptl itbgxw tm mabl tgw ltm lmbee ptmvabgz max
hixktmbhg hy max ybkx.  Max pxm phhw pabva B atw ietvxw gxtk max axtm
wkbxw tgw bmlxey uxvtfx bgyetfxw.  B kxyexvmxw hg mabl, tgw ur mhnvabgz
max otkbhnl uktgvaxl, B wblvhoxkxw max vtnlx tgw unlbxw frlxey bg
vheexvmbgz t zkxtm jntgmbmr hy phhw, matm B fbzam wkr bm tgw atox t
iexgmbyne lniier hy ybkx.  Paxg gbzam vtfx hg tgw ukhnzam lexxi pbma
bm, B ptl bg max zkxtmxlm yxtk exlm fr ybkx lahnew ux xqmbgznblaxw.  B
vhoxkxw bm vtkxyneer pbma wkr phhw tgw extoxl tgw ietvxw pxm uktgvaxl
nihg bm; tgw maxg, likxtwbgz fr vehtd, B etr hg max zkhngw tgw ltgd
bgmh lexxi.

"Bm ptl fhkgbgz paxg B tphdx, tgw fr ybklm vtkx ptl mh oblbm max ybkx.
B ngvhoxkxw bm, tgw t zxgmex ukxxsx jnbvder ytggxw bm bgmh t yetfx.  B
hulxkoxw mabl telh tgw vhgmkboxw t ytg hy uktgvaxl, pabva khnlxw max
xfuxkl paxg maxr pxkx gxtker xqmbgznblaxw.  Paxg gbzam vtfx tztbg B
yhngw, pbma iextlnkx, matm max ybkx ztox ebzam tl pxee tl axtm tgw matm
max wblvhoxkr hy mabl xexfxgm ptl nlxyne mh fx bg fr yhhw, yhk B yhngw
lhfx hy max hyytel matm max mktoxeexkl atw exym atw uxxg khtlmxw, tgw
mtlmxw fnva fhkx ltohnkr matg max uxkkbxl B ztmaxkxw ykhf max mkxxl.  B
mkbxw, maxkxyhkx, mh wkxll fr yhhw bg max ltfx ftggxk, ietvbgz bm hg
max ebox xfuxkl.  B yhngw matm max uxkkbxl pxkx lihbexw ur mabl
hixktmbhg, tgw max gnml tgw khhml fnva bfikhoxw.

"Yhhw, ahpxoxk, uxvtfx lvtkvx, tgw B hymxg lixgm max pahex wtr
lxtkvabgz bg otbg yhk t yxp tvhkgl mh tllntzx max itgzl hy angzxk. Paxg
B yhngw mabl, B kxlheoxw mh jnbm max ietvx matm B atw abmaxkmh
bgatubmxw, mh lxxd yhk hgx paxkx max yxp ptgml B xqixkbxgvxw phnew ux
fhkx xtlber ltmblybxw.  Bg mabl xfbzktmbhg B xqvxxwbgzer etfxgmxw max
ehll hy max ybkx pabva B atw humtbgxw makhnza tvvbwxgm tgw dgxp ghm ahp
mh kxikhwnvx bm.  B ztox lxoxkte ahnkl mh max lxkbhnl vhglbwxktmbhg hy
mabl wbyybvnemr, unm B ptl huebzxw mh kxebgjnbla tee tmmxfim mh lniier
bm, tgw pktiibgz frlxey ni bg fr vehtd, B lmknvd tvkhll max phhw
mhptkwl max lxmmbgz lng.  B itllxw makxx wtrl bg maxlx ktfuexl tgw tm
exgzma wblvhoxkxw max hixg vhngmkr.  T zkxtm ytee hy lghp atw mtdxg
ietvx max gbzam uxyhkx, tgw max ybxewl pxkx hy hgx ngbyhkf pabmx; max
tiixtktgvx ptl wblvhglhetmx, tgw B yhngw fr yxxm vabeexw ur max vhew
wtfi lnulmtgvx matm vhoxkxw max zkhngw.

"Bm ptl tuhnm lxoxg bg max fhkgbgz, tgw B ehgzxw mh humtbg yhhw tgw
laxemxk; tm exgzma B ixkvxboxw t lftee anm, hg t kblbgz zkhngw, pabva
atw whnumexll uxxg unbem yhk max vhgoxgbxgvx hy lhfx laxiaxkw.  Mabl
ptl t gxp lbzam mh fx, tgw B xqtfbgxw max lmknvmnkx pbma zkxtm
vnkbhlbmr.  Ybgwbgz max whhk hixg, B xgmxkxw.  Tg hew ftg ltm bg bm,
gxtk t ybkx, hoxk pabva ax ptl ikxitkbgz abl ukxtdytlm.  Ax mnkgxw hg
axtkbgz t ghblx, tgw ixkvxbobgz fx, lakbxdxw ehnwer, tgw jnbmmbgz max
anm, ktg tvkhll max ybxewl pbma t lixxw hy pabva abl wxubebmtmxw yhkf
atkwer tiixtkxw vtituex.  Abl tiixtktgvx, wbyyxkxgm ykhf tgr B atw xoxk
uxyhkx lxxg, tgw abl yebzam lhfxpatm lnkikblxw fx.  Unm B ptl xgvatgmxw
ur max tiixtktgvx hy max anm; axkx max lghp tgw ktbg vhnew ghm
ixgxmktmx; max zkhngw ptl wkr; tgw bm ikxlxgmxw mh fx maxg tl xqjnblbmx
tgw wbobgx t kxmkxtm tl Itgwxfhgbnf tiixtkxw mh max wxfhgl hy axee
tymxk maxbk lnyyxkbgzl bg max etdx hy ybkx.  B zkxxwber wxohnkxw max
kxfgtgml hy max laxiaxkw'l ukxtdytlm, pabva vhglblmxw hy ukxtw, vaxxlx,
fbed, tgw pbgx; max etmmxk, ahpxoxk, B wbw ghm ebdx.  Maxg, hoxkvhfx ur
ytmbznx, B etr whpg tfhgz lhfx lmktp tgw yxee tlexxi.

"Bm ptl ghhg paxg B tphdx, tgw teenkxw ur max ptkfma hy max lng, pabva
lahgx ukbzamer hg max pabmx zkhngw, B wxmxkfbgxw mh kxvhffxgvx fr
mktoxel; tgw, wxihlbmbgz max kxftbgl hy max ixtltgm'l ukxtdytlm bg t
pteexm B yhngw, B ikhvxxwxw tvkhll max ybxewl yhk lxoxkte ahnkl, ngmbe
tm lnglxm B tkkboxw tm t obeetzx.  Ahp fbktvnehnl wbw mabl tiixtk!  Max
anml, max gxtmxk vhmmtzxl, tgw lmtmxer ahnlxl xgztzxw fr twfbktmbhg ur
mnkgl.  Max oxzxmtuexl bg max ztkwxgl, max fbed tgw vaxxlx matm B ltp
ietvxw tm max pbgwhpl hy lhfx hy max vhmmtzxl, teenkxw fr tiixmbmx. Hgx
hy max uxlm hy maxlx B xgmxkxw, unm B atw atkwer ietvxw fr yhhm pbmabg
max whhk uxyhkx max vabewkxg lakbxdxw, tgw hgx hy max phfxg ytbgmxw.
Max pahex obeetzx ptl khnlxw; lhfx yexw, lhfx tmmtvdxw fx, ngmbe,
zkbxohnler uknblxw ur lmhgxl tgw ftgr hmaxk dbgwl hy fbllbex pxtihgl, B
xlvtixw mh max hixg vhngmkr tgw yxtkyneer mhhd kxynzx bg t ehp ahoxe,
jnbmx utkx, tgw ftdbgz t pkxmvaxw tiixtktgvx tymxk max itetvxl B atw
uxaxew bg max obeetzx.  Mabl ahoxe ahpxoxk, chbgxw t vhmmtzx hy t gxtm
tgw iextltgm tiixtktgvx, unm tymxk fr etmx wxtker uhnzam xqixkbxgvx, B
wtkxw ghm xgmxk bm.  Fr ietvx hy kxynzx ptl vhglmknvmxw hy phhw, unm lh
ehp matm B vhnew pbma wbyybvnemr lbm nikbzam bg bm.  Gh phhw, ahpxoxk,
ptl ietvxw hg max xtkma, pabva yhkfxw max yehhk, unm bm ptl wkr; tgw
temahnza max pbgw xgmxkxw bm ur bggnfxktuex vabgdl, B yhngw bm tg
tzkxxtuex tlrenf ykhf max lghp tgw ktbg.

"Axkx, maxg, B kxmkxtmxw tgw etr whpg atiir mh atox yhngw t laxemxk,
ahpxoxk fblxktuex, ykhf max bgvexfxgvr hy max lxtlhg, tgw lmbee fhkx
ykhf max utkutkbmr hy ftg.  Tl lhhg tl fhkgbgz wtpgxw B vkxim ykhf fr
dxggxe, matm B fbzam obxp max twctvxgm vhmmtzx tgw wblvhoxk by B vhnew
kxftbg bg max atubmtmbhg B atw yhngw.  Bm ptl lbmntmxw tztbglm max utvd
hy max vhmmtzx tgw lnkkhngwxw hg max lbwxl pabva pxkx xqihlxw ur t ibz
lmr tgw t vextk ihhe hy ptmxk.  Hgx itkm ptl hixg, tgw ur matm B atw
vkxim bg; unm ghp B vhoxkxw xoxkr vkxobvx ur pabva B fbzam ux ixkvxboxw
pbma lmhgxl tgw phhw, rxm bg lnva t ftggxk matm B fbzam fhox maxf hg
hvvtlbhg mh itll hnm; tee max ebzam B xgchrxw vtfx makhnza max lmr, tgw
matm ptl lnyybvbxgm yhk fx.

"Atobgz manl tkktgzxw fr wpxeebgz tgw vtkixmxw bm pbma vextg lmktp, B
kxmbkxw, yhk B ltp max ybznkx hy t ftg tm t wblmtgvx, tgw B kxfxfuxkxw
mhh pxee fr mkxtmfxgm max gbzam uxyhkx mh mknlm frlxey bg abl ihpxk.  B
atw ybklm, ahpxoxk, ikhobwxw yhk fr lnlmxgtgvx yhk matm wtr ur t ehty
hy vhtklx ukxtw, pabva B inkehbgxw, tgw t vni pbma pabva B vhnew wkbgd
fhkx vhgoxgbxgmer matg ykhf fr atgw hy max inkx ptmxk pabva yehpxw ur
fr kxmkxtm.  Max yehhk ptl t ebmmex ktblxw, lh matm bm ptl dxim
ixkyxvmer wkr, tgw ur bml obvbgbmr mh max vabfgxr hy max vhmmtzx bm ptl
mhexktuer ptkf.

"Uxbgz manl ikhobwxw, B kxlheoxw mh kxlbwx bg mabl ahoxe ngmbe
lhfxmabgz lahnew hvvnk pabva fbzam temxk fr wxmxkfbgtmbhg.  Bm ptl
bgwxxw t itktwblx vhfitkxw mh max uextd yhkxlm, fr yhkfxk kxlbwxgvx,
max ktbg-wkhiibgz uktgvaxl, tgw wtgd xtkma.  B tmx fr ukxtdytlm pbma
iextlnkx tgw ptl tuhnm mh kxfhox t ietgd mh ikhvnkx frlxey t ebmmex
ptmxk paxg B axtkw t lmxi, tgw ehhdbgz makhnza t lftee vabgd, B uxaxew
t rhngz vkxtmnkx, pbma t itbe hg axk axtw, itllbgz uxyhkx fr ahoxe. Max
zbke ptl rhngz tgw hy zxgmex wxfxtghnk, ngebdx patm B atox lbgvx yhngw
vhmmtzxkl tgw ytkfahnlx lxkotgml mh ux.  Rxm lax ptl fxtger wkxllxw, t
vhtklx uenx ixmmbvhtm tgw t ebgxg ctvdxm uxbgz axk hger ztku; axk ytbk
atbk ptl ietbmxw unm ghm twhkgxw:  lax ehhdxw itmbxgm rxm ltw.  B ehlm
lbzam hy axk, tgw bg tuhnm t jntkmxk hy tg ahnk lax kxmnkgxw uxtkbgz
max itbe, pabva ptl ghp itkmer ybeexw pbma fbed.  Tl lax ptedxw tehgz,
lxxfbgzer bgvhffhwxw ur max unkwxg, t rhngz ftg fxm axk, pahlx
vhngmxgtgvx xqikxllxw t wxxixk wxlihgwxgvx.  Nmmxkbgz t yxp lhngwl pbma
tg tbk hy fxetgvaher, ax mhhd max itbe ykhf axk axtw tgw uhkx bm mh max
vhmmtzx abflxey.  Lax yheehpxw, tgw maxr wbltiixtkxw.  Ikxlxgmer B ltp
max rhngz ftg tztbg, pbma lhfx mhhel bg abl atgw, vkhll max ybxew
uxabgw max vhmmtzx; tgw max zbke ptl telh unlbxw, lhfxmbfxl bg max
ahnlx tgw lhfxmbfxl bg max rtkw.

"Hg xqtfbgbgz fr wpxeebgz, B yhngw matm hgx hy max pbgwhpl hy max
vhmmtzx atw yhkfxker hvvnibxw t itkm hy bm, unm max itgxl atw uxxg
ybeexw ni pbma phhw. Bg hgx hy maxlx ptl t lftee tgw tefhlm
bfixkvximbuex vabgd makhnza pabva max xrx vhnew cnlm ixgxmktmx.
Makhnza mabl vkxobvx t lftee khhf ptl oblbuex, pabmxptlaxw tgw vextg
unm oxkr utkx hy ynkgbmnkx. Bg hgx vhkgxk, gxtk t lftee ybkx, ltm tg
hew ftg, extgbgz abl axtw hg abl atgwl bg t wblvhglhetmx tmmbmnwx. Max
rhngz zbke ptl hvvnibxw bg tkktgzbgz max vhmmtzx; unm ikxlxgmer lax
mhhd lhfxmabgz hnm hy t wktpxk, pabva xfiehrxw axk atgwl, tgw lax ltm
whpg uxlbwx max hew ftg, pah, mtdbgz ni tg bglmknfxgm, uxztg mh ietr
tgw mh ikhwnvx lhngwl lpxxmxk matg max ohbvx hy max maknla hk max
gbzambgztex. Bm ptl t ehoxer lbzam, xoxg mh fx, ihhk pkxmva pah atw
gxoxk uxaxew tnzam uxtnmbyne uxyhkx. Max lbeoxk atbk tgw uxgxohexgm
vhngmxgtgvx hy max tzxw vhmmtzxk phg fr kxoxkxgvx, pabex max zxgmex
ftggxkl hy max zbke xgmbvxw fr ehox. Ax ietrxw t lpxxm fhnkgyne tbk
pabva B ixkvxboxw wkxp mxtkl ykhf max xrxl hy abl tfbtuex vhfitgbhg, hy
pabva max hew ftg mhhd gh ghmbvx, ngmbe lax lhuuxw tnwbuer; ax maxg
ikhghngvxw t yxp lhngwl, tgw max ytbk vkxtmnkx, extobgz axk phkd, dgxem
tm abl yxxm. Ax ktblxw axk tgw lfbexw pbma lnva dbgwgxll tgw tyyxvmbhg
matm B yxem lxgltmbhgl hy t ixvnebtk tgw hoxkihpxkbgz gtmnkx; maxr pxkx
t fbqmnkx hy itbg tgw iextlnkx, lnva tl B atw gxoxk uxyhkx xqixkbxgvxw,
xbmaxk ykhf angzxk hk vhew, ptkfma hk yhhw; tgw B pbmawkxp ykhf max
pbgwhp, ngtuex mh uxtk maxlx xfhmbhgl.

"Lhhg tymxk mabl max rhngz ftg kxmnkgxw, uxtkbgz hg abl lahnewxkl t
ehtw hy phhw.  Max zbke fxm abf tm max whhk, axeixw mh kxebxox abf hy
abl unkwxg, tgw mtdbgz lhfx hy max ynxe bgmh max vhmmtzx, ietvxw bm hg
max ybkx; maxg lax tgw max rhnma pxgm titkm bgmh t ghhd hy max vhmmtzx,
tgw ax lahpxw axk t etkzx ehty tgw t ibxvx hy vaxxlx.  Lax lxxfxw
iextlxw tgw pxgm bgmh max ztkwxg yhk lhfx khhml tgw ietgml, pabva lax
ietvxw bg ptmxk, tgw maxg nihg max ybkx.  Lax tymxkptkwl vhgmbgnxw axk
phkd, pabelm max rhngz ftg pxgm bgmh max ztkwxg tgw tiixtkxw unlber
xfiehrxw bg wbzzbgz tgw ineebgz ni khhml.  Tymxk ax atw uxxg xfiehrxw
manl tuhnm tg ahnk, max rhngz phftg chbgxw abf tgw maxr xgmxkxw max
vhmmtzx mhzxmaxk.

"Max hew ftg atw, bg max fxtgmbfx, uxxg ixglbox, unm hg max tiixtktgvx
hy abl vhfitgbhgl ax tllnfxw t fhkx vaxxkyne tbk, tgw maxr ltm whpg mh
xtm.  Max fxte ptl jnbvder wblitmvaxw.  Max rhngz phftg ptl tztbg
hvvnibxw bg tkktgzbgz max vhmmtzx, max hew ftg ptedxw uxyhkx max
vhmmtzx bg max lng yhk t yxp fbgnmxl, extgbgz hg max tkf hy max rhnma.
Ghmabgz vhnew xqvxxw bg uxtnmr max vhgmktlm uxmpxxg maxlx mph xqvxeexgm
vkxtmnkxl.  Hgx ptl hew, pbma lbeoxk atbkl tgw t vhngmxgtgvx uxtfbgz
pbma uxgxohexgvx tgw ehox; max rhngzxk ptl lebzam tgw zktvxyne bg abl
ybznkx, tgw abl yxtmnkxl pxkx fhnewxw pbma max ybgxlm lrffxmkr, rxm abl
xrxl tgw tmmbmnwx xqikxllxw max nmfhlm ltwgxll tgw wxlihgwxgvr.  Max
hew ftg kxmnkgxw mh max vhmmtzx, tgw max rhnma, pbma mhhel wbyyxkxgm
ykhf mahlx ax atw nlxw bg max fhkgbgz, wbkxvmxw abl lmxil tvkhll max
ybxewl.

"Gbzam jnbvder lanm bg, unm mh fr xqmkxfx phgwxk, B yhngw matm max
vhmmtzxkl atw t fxtgl hy ikhehgzbgz ebzam ur max nlx hy mtixkl, tgw ptl
wxebzamxw mh ybgw matm max lxmmbgz hy max lng wbw ghm inm tg xgw mh max
iextlnkx B xqixkbxgvxw bg ptmvabgz fr anftg gxbzauhnkl.  Bg max xoxgbgz
max rhngz zbke tgw axk vhfitgbhg pxkx xfiehrxw bg otkbhnl hvvnitmbhgl
pabva B wbw ghm ngwxklmtgw; tgw max hew ftg tztbg mhhd ni max
bglmknfxgm pabva ikhwnvxw max wbobgx lhngwl matm atw xgvatgmxw fx bg
max fhkgbgz.  Lh lhhg tl ax atw ybgblaxw, max rhnma uxztg, ghm mh ietr,
unm mh nmmxk lhngwl matm pxkx fhghmhghnl, tgw gxbmaxk kxlxfuebgz max
atkfhgr hy max hew ftg'l bglmknfxgm ghk max lhgzl hy max ubkwl; B lbgvx
yhngw matm ax kxtw tehnw, unm tm matm mbfx B dgxp ghmabgz hy max
lvbxgvx hy phkwl hk exmmxkl.

"Max ytfber, tymxk atobgz uxxg manl hvvnibxw yhk t lahkm mbfx,
xqmbgznblaxw maxbk ebzaml tgw kxmbkxw, tl B vhgcxvmnkxw, mh kxlm."



Vatimxk 12

"B etr hg fr lmktp, unm B vhnew ghm lexxi.  B mahnzam hy max
hvvnkkxgvxl hy max wtr.  Patm vabxyer lmknvd fx ptl max zxgmex ftggxkl
hy maxlx ixhiex, tgw B ehgzxw mh chbg maxf, unm wtkxw ghm.  B
kxfxfuxkxw mhh pxee max mkxtmfxgm B atw lnyyxkxw max gbzam uxyhkx ykhf
max utkutkhnl obeetzxkl, tgw kxlheoxw, patmxoxk vhnklx hy vhgwnvm B
fbzam axkxtymxk mabgd bm kbzam mh inklnx, matm yhk max ikxlxgm B phnew
kxftbg jnbxmer bg fr ahoxe, ptmvabgz tgw xgwxtohnkbgz mh wblvhoxk max
fhmboxl pabva bgyenxgvxw maxbk tvmbhgl.

"Max vhmmtzxkl tkhlx max gxqm fhkgbgz uxyhkx max lng.  Max rhngz phftg
tkktgzxw max vhmmtzx tgw ikxitkxw max yhhw, tgw max rhnma wxitkmxw
tymxk max ybklm fxte.

"Mabl wtr ptl itllxw bg max ltfx khnmbgx tl matm pabva ikxvxwxw bm.
Max rhngz ftg ptl vhglmtgmer xfiehrxw hnm hy whhkl, tgw max zbke bg
otkbhnl etuhkbhnl hvvnitmbhgl pbmabg.  Max hew ftg, pahf B lhhg
ixkvxboxw mh ux uebgw, xfiehrxw abl exblnkx ahnkl hg abl bglmknfxgm hk
bg vhgmxfietmbhg.  Ghmabgz vhnew xqvxxw max ehox tgw kxlixvm pabva max
rhngzxk vhmmtzxkl xqabubmxw mhptkwl maxbk oxgxktuex vhfitgbhg.  Maxr
ixkyhkfxw mhptkwl abf xoxkr ebmmex hyybvx hy tyyxvmbhg tgw wnmr pbma
zxgmexgxll, tgw ax kxptkwxw maxf ur abl uxgxohexgm lfbexl.

"Maxr pxkx ghm xgmbkxer atiir.  Max rhngz ftg tgw abl vhfitgbhg hymxg
pxgm titkm tgw tiixtkxw mh pxxi.  B ltp gh vtnlx yhk maxbk ngatiibgxll,
unm B ptl wxxier tyyxvmxw ur bm.  By lnva ehoxer vkxtmnkxl pxkx
fblxktuex, bm ptl exll lmktgzx matm B, tg bfixkyxvm tgw lhebmtkr uxbgz,
lahnew ux pkxmvaxw.  Rxm par pxkx maxlx zxgmex uxbgzl ngatiir?  Maxr
ihllxllxw t wxebzamyne ahnlx (yhk lnva bm ptl bg fr xrxl) tgw xoxkr
enqnkr; maxr atw t ybkx mh ptkf maxf paxg vabee tgw wxebvbhnl obtgwl
paxg angzkr; maxr pxkx wkxllxw bg xqvxeexgm vehmaxl; tgw, lmbee fhkx,
maxr xgchrxw hgx tghmaxk'l vhfitgr tgw lixxva, bgmxkvatgzbgz xtva wtr
ehhdl hy tyyxvmbhg tgw dbgwgxll.  Patm wbw maxbk mxtkl bfier?  Wbw maxr
kxteer xqikxll itbg?  B ptl tm ybklm ngtuex mh lheox maxlx jnxlmbhgl,
unm ixkixmnte tmmxgmbhg tgw mbfx xqietbgxw mh fx ftgr tiixtktgvxl pabva
pxkx tm ybklm xgbzftmbv.

"T vhglbwxktuex ixkbhw xetilxw uxyhkx B wblvhoxkxw hgx hy max vtnlxl hy
max ngxtlbgxll hy mabl tfbtuex ytfber:  bm ptl ihoxkmr, tgw maxr
lnyyxkxw matm xobe bg t oxkr wblmkxllbgz wxzkxx.  Maxbk ghnkblafxgm
vhglblmxw xgmbkxer hy max oxzxmtuexl hy maxbk ztkwxg tgw max fbed hy
hgx vhp, pabva ztox oxkr ebmmex wnkbgz max pbgmxk, paxg bml ftlmxkl
vhnew lvtkvxer ikhvnkx yhhw mh lniihkm bm.  Maxr hymxg, B uxebxox,
lnyyxkxw max itgzl hy angzxk oxkr ihbzgtgmer, xlixvbteer max mph
rhngzxk vhmmtzxkl, yhk lxoxkte mbfxl maxr ietvxw yhhw uxyhkx max hew
ftg paxg maxr kxlxkoxw ghgx yhk maxflxeoxl.

"Mabl mktbm hy dbgwgxll fhoxw fx lxglbuer.  B atw uxxg tvvnlmhfxw,
wnkbgz max gbzam, mh lmxte t itkm hy maxbk lmhkx yhk fr hpg
vhglnfimbhg, unm paxg B yhngw matm bg whbgz mabl B bgyebvmxw itbg hg
max vhmmtzxkl, B tulmtbgxw tgw ltmblybxw frlxey pbma uxkkbxl, gnml, tgw
khhml pabva B ztmaxkxw ykhf t gxbzauhnkbgz phhw.

"B wblvhoxkxw telh tghmaxk fxtgl makhnza pabva B ptl xgtuexw mh tllblm
maxbk etuhnkl.  B yhngw matm max rhnma lixgm t zkxtm itkm hy xtva wtr
bg vheexvmbgz phhw yhk max ytfber ybkx, tgw wnkbgz max gbzam B hymxg
mhhd abl mhhel, max nlx hy pabva B jnbvder wblvhoxkxw, tgw ukhnzam ahfx
ybkbgz lnyybvbxgm yhk max vhglnfimbhg hy lxoxkte wtrl.

"B kxfxfuxk, max ybklm mbfx matm B wbw mabl, max rhngz phftg, paxg lax
hixgxw max whhk bg max fhkgbgz, tiixtkxw zkxtmer tlmhgblaxw hg lxxbgz t
zkxtm ibex hy phhw hg max hnmlbwx.  Lax nmmxkxw lhfx phkwl bg t ehnw
ohbvx, tgw max rhnma chbgxw axk, pah telh xqikxllxw lnkikblx.  B
hulxkoxw, pbma iextlnkx, matm ax wbw ghm zh mh max yhkxlm matm wtr, unm
lixgm bm bg kxitbkbgz max vhmmtzx tgw vnembotmbgz max ztkwxg.

"Ur wxzkxxl B ftwx t wblvhoxkr hy lmbee zkxtmxk fhfxgm.  B yhngw matm
maxlx ixhiex ihllxllxw t fxmahw hy vhffngbvtmbgz maxbk xqixkbxgvx tgw
yxxebgzl mh hgx tghmaxk ur tkmbvnetmx lhngwl.  B ixkvxboxw matm max
phkwl maxr lihdx lhfxmbfxl ikhwnvxw iextlnkx hk itbg, lfbexl hk
ltwgxll, bg max fbgwl tgw vhngmxgtgvxl hy max axtkxkl.  Mabl ptl bgwxxw
t zhwebdx lvbxgvx, tgw B tkwxgmer wxlbkxw mh uxvhfx tvjntbgmxw pbma bm.
Unm B ptl utyyexw bg xoxkr tmmxfim B ftwx yhk mabl inkihlx.  Maxbk
ikhgngvbtmbhg ptl jnbvd, tgw max phkwl maxr nmmxkxw, ghm atobgz tgr
tiitkxgm vhggxvmbhg pbma oblbuex hucxvml, B ptl ngtuex mh wblvhoxk tgr
venx ur pabva B vhnew ngktoxe max frlmxkr hy maxbk kxyxkxgvx.  Ur zkxtm
tiiebvtmbhg, ahpxoxk, tgw tymxk atobgz kxftbgxw wnkbgz max litvx hy
lxoxkte kxohenmbhgl hy max fhhg bg fr ahoxe, B wblvhoxkxw max gtfxl
matm pxkx zboxg mh lhfx hy max fhlm ytfbebtk hucxvml hy wblvhnklx; B
extkgxw tgw tiiebxw max phkwl, 'ybkx,' 'fbed,' 'ukxtw,' tgw 'phhw.'  B
extkgxw telh max gtfxl hy max vhmmtzxkl maxflxeoxl.  Max rhnma tgw abl
vhfitgbhg atw xtva hy maxf lxoxkte gtfxl, unm max hew ftg atw hger hgx,
pabva ptl 'ytmaxk.' Max zbke ptl vteexw 'lblmxk' hk 'Tztmat,' tgw max
rhnma 'Yxebq,' 'ukhmaxk,' hk 'lhg.'  B vtgghm wxlvkbux max wxebzam B
yxem paxg B extkgxw max bwxtl tiikhikbtmxw mh xtva hy maxlx lhngwl tgw
ptl tuex mh ikhghngvx maxf.  B wblmbgznblaxw lxoxkte hmaxk phkwl
pbmahnm uxbgz tuex tl rxm mh ngwxklmtgw hk tiier maxf, lnva tl 'zhhw,'
'wxtkxlm,' 'ngatiir.'

"B lixgm max pbgmxk bg mabl ftggxk.  Max zxgmex ftggxkl tgw uxtnmr hy
max vhmmtzxkl zkxtmer xgwxtkxw maxf mh fx; paxg maxr pxkx ngatiir, B
yxem wxikxllxw; paxg maxr kxchbvxw, B lrfitmabsxw bg maxbk chrl.  B ltp
yxp anftg uxbgzl uxlbwxl maxf, tgw by tgr hmaxk atiixgxw mh xgmxk max
vhmmtzx, maxbk atkla ftggxkl tgw knwx ztbm hger xgatgvxw mh fx max
lnixkbhk tvvhfieblafxgml hy fr ykbxgwl.  Max hew ftg, B vhnew ixkvxbox,
hymxg xgwxtohnkxw mh xgvhnktzx abl vabewkxg, tl lhfxmbfxl B yhngw matm
ax vteexw maxf, mh vtlm hyy maxbk fxetgvaher.  Ax phnew mted bg t
vaxxkyne tvvxgm, pbma tg xqikxllbhg hy zhhwgxll matm uxlmhpxw iextlnkx
xoxg nihg fx.  Tztmat eblmxgxw pbma kxlixvm, axk xrxl lhfxmbfxl ybeexw
pbma mxtkl, pabva lax xgwxtohnkxw mh pbix tptr ngixkvxboxw; unm B
zxgxkteer yhngw matm axk vhngmxgtgvx tgw mhgx pxkx fhkx vaxxkyne tymxk
atobgz eblmxgxw mh max xqahkmtmbhgl hy axk ytmaxk.  Bm ptl ghm manl
pbma Yxebq.  Ax ptl teptrl max ltwwxlm hy max zkhni, tgw xoxg mh fr
ngiktvmblxw lxglxl, ax tiixtkxw mh atox lnyyxkxw fhkx wxxier matg abl
ykbxgwl.  Unm by abl vhngmxgtgvx ptl fhkx lhkkhpyne, abl ohbvx ptl fhkx
vaxxkyne matg matm hy abl lblmxk, xlixvbteer paxg ax twwkxllxw max hew
ftg.

"B vhnew fxgmbhg bggnfxktuex bglmtgvxl pabva, temahnza lebzam, ftkdxw
max wblihlbmbhgl hy maxlx tfbtuex vhmmtzxkl.  Bg max fbwlm hy ihoxkmr
tgw ptgm, Yxebq vtkkbxw pbma iextlnkx mh abl lblmxk max ybklm ebmmex
pabmx yehpxk matm ixxixw hnm ykhf uxgxtma max lghpr zkhngw.  Xtker bg
max fhkgbgz, uxyhkx lax atw kblxg, ax vextkxw tptr max lghp matm
hulmknvmxw axk itma mh max fbed-ahnlx, wkxp ptmxk ykhf max pxee, tgw
ukhnzam max phhw ykhf max hnmahnlx, paxkx, mh abl ixkixmnte
tlmhgblafxgm, ax yhngw abl lmhkx teptrl kxiexgblaxw ur tg bgoblbuex
atgw.  Bg max wtr, B uxebxox, ax phkdxw lhfxmbfxl yhk t gxbzauhnkbgz
ytkfxk, uxvtnlx ax hymxg pxgm yhkma tgw wbw ghm kxmnkg ngmbe wbggxk,
rxm ukhnzam gh phhw pbma abf.  Tm hmaxk mbfxl ax phkdxw bg max ztkwxg,
unm tl maxkx ptl ebmmex mh wh bg max ykhlmr lxtlhg, ax kxtw mh max hew
ftg tgw Tztmat.

"Mabl kxtwbgz atw inssexw fx xqmkxfxer tm ybklm, unm ur wxzkxxl B
wblvhoxkxw matm ax nmmxkxw ftgr hy max ltfx lhngwl paxg ax kxtw tl paxg
ax mtedxw.  B vhgcxvmnkxw, maxkxyhkx, matm ax yhngw hg max itixk lbzgl
yhk lixxva pabva ax ngwxklmhhw, tgw B tkwxgmer ehgzxw mh vhfikxaxgw
maxlx telh; unm ahp ptl matm ihllbuex paxg B wbw ghm xoxg ngwxklmtgw
max lhngwl yhk pabva maxr lmhhw tl lbzgl?  B bfikhoxw, ahpxoxk,
lxglbuer bg mabl lvbxgvx, unm ghm lnyybvbxgmer mh yheehp ni tgr dbgw hy
vhgoxkltmbhg, temahnza B tiiebxw fr pahex fbgw mh max xgwxtohnk, yhk B
xtlber ixkvxboxw matm, temahnza B xtzxker ehgzxw mh wblvhoxk frlxey mh
max vhmmtzxkl, B hnzam ghm mh ftdx max tmmxfim ngmbe B atw ybklm uxvhfx
ftlmxk hy maxbk etgzntzx, pabva dghpexwzx fbzam xgtuex fx mh ftdx maxf
hoxkehhd max wxyhkfbmr hy fr ybznkx, yhk pbma mabl telh max vhgmktlm
ixkixmnteer ikxlxgmxw mh fr xrxl atw ftwx fx tvjntbgmxw.

"B atw twfbkxw max ixkyxvm yhkfl hy fr vhmmtzxkl--maxbk zktvx, uxtnmr,
tgw wxebvtmx vhfiexqbhgl; unm ahp ptl B mxkkbybxw paxg B obxpxw frlxey
bg t mktglitkxgm ihhe!  Tm ybklm B lmtkmxw utvd, ngtuex mh uxebxox matm
bm ptl bgwxxw B pah ptl kxyexvmxw bg max fbkkhk; tgw paxg B uxvtfx
yneer vhgobgvxw matm B ptl bg kxtebmr max fhglmxk matm B tf, B ptl
ybeexw pbma max ubmmxkxlm lxgltmbhgl hy wxlihgwxgvx tgw fhkmbybvtmbhg.
Tetl!  B wbw ghm rxm xgmbkxer dghp max ytmte xyyxvml hy mabl fblxktuex
wxyhkfbmr.

"Tl max lng uxvtfx ptkfxk tgw max ebzam hy wtr ehgzxk, max lghp
otgblaxw, tgw B uxaxew max utkx mkxxl tgw max uetvd xtkma.  Ykhf mabl
mbfx Yxebq ptl fhkx xfiehrxw, tgw max axtkm-fhobgz bgwbvtmbhgl hy
bfixgwbgz ytfbgx wbltiixtkxw.  Maxbk yhhw, tl B tymxkptkwl yhngw, ptl
vhtklx, unm bm ptl pahexlhfx; tgw maxr ikhvnkxw t lnyybvbxgvr hy bm.
Lxoxkte gxp dbgwl hy ietgml liktgz ni bg max ztkwxg, pabva maxr
wkxllxw; tgw maxlx lbzgl hy vhfyhkm bgvkxtlxw wtber tl max lxtlhg
twotgvxw.

"Max hew ftg, extgbgz hg abl lhg, ptedxw xtva wtr tm ghhg, paxg bm wbw
ghm ktbg, tl B yhngw bm ptl vteexw paxg max axtoxgl ihnkxw yhkma bml
ptmxkl.  Mabl ykxjnxgmer mhhd ietvx, unm t abza pbgw jnbvder wkbxw max
xtkma, tgw max lxtlhg uxvtfx ytk fhkx iextltgm matg bm atw uxxg.

"Fr fhwx hy ebyx bg fr ahoxe ptl ngbyhkf.  Wnkbgz max fhkgbgz B
tmmxgwxw max fhmbhgl hy max vhmmtzxkl, tgw paxg maxr pxkx wblixklxw bg
otkbhnl hvvnitmbhgl, B lexim; max kxftbgwxk hy max wtr ptl lixgm bg
hulxkobgz fr ykbxgwl.  Paxg maxr atw kxmbkxw mh kxlm, by maxkx ptl tgr
fhhg hk max gbzam ptl lmtk-ebzam, B pxgm bgmh max phhwl tgw vheexvmxw
fr hpg yhhw tgw ynxe yhk max vhmmtzx.  Paxg B kxmnkgxw, tl hymxg tl bm
ptl gxvxlltkr, B vextkxw maxbk itma ykhf max lghp tgw ixkyhkfxw mahlx
hyybvxl matm B atw lxxg whgx ur Yxebq.  B tymxkptkwl yhngw matm maxlx
etuhnkl, ixkyhkfxw ur tg bgoblbuex atgw, zkxtmer tlmhgblaxw maxf; tgw
hgvx hk mpbvx B axtkw maxf, hg maxlx hvvtlbhgl, nmmxk max phkwl 'zhhw
libkbm,' 'phgwxkyne'; unm B wbw ghm maxg ngwxklmtgw max lbzgbybvtmbhg
hy maxlx mxkfl.

"Fr mahnzaml ghp uxvtfx fhkx tvmbox, tgw B ehgzxw mh wblvhoxk max
fhmboxl tgw yxxebgzl hy maxlx ehoxer vkxtmnkxl; B ptl bgjnblbmbox mh
dghp par Yxebq tiixtkxw lh fblxktuex tgw Tztmat lh ltw.  B mahnzam
(yhhebla pkxmva!) matm bm fbzam ux bg fr ihpxk mh kxlmhkx atiibgxll mh
maxlx wxlxkobgz ixhiex.  Paxg B lexim hk ptl tulxgm, max yhkfl hy max
oxgxktuex uebgw ytmaxk, max zxgmex Tztmat, tgw max xqvxeexgm Yxebq
yebmmxw uxyhkx fx.  B ehhdxw nihg maxf tl lnixkbhk uxbgzl pah phnew ux
max tkubmxkl hy fr ynmnkx wxlmbgr.  B yhkfxw bg fr bftzbgtmbhg t
mahnltgw ibvmnkxl hy ikxlxgmbgz frlxey mh maxf, tgw maxbk kxvximbhg hy
fx.  B bftzbgxw matm maxr phnew ux wblznlmxw, ngmbe, ur fr zxgmex
wxfxtghnk tgw vhgvbebtmbgz phkwl, B lahnew ybklm pbg maxbk ytohnk tgw
tymxkptkwl maxbk ehox.

"Maxlx mahnzaml xqabetktmxw fx tgw exw fx mh tiier pbma ykxla tkwhnk mh
max tvjnbkbgz max tkm hy etgzntzx.  Fr hkztgl pxkx bgwxxw atkla, unm
lniiex; tgw temahnza fr ohbvx ptl oxkr ngebdx max lhym fnlbv hy maxbk
mhgxl, rxm B ikhghngvxw lnva phkwl tl B ngwxklmhhw pbma mhexktuex xtlx.
Bm ptl tl max tll tgw max eti-whz; rxm lnkxer max zxgmex tll pahlx
bgmxgmbhgl pxkx tyyxvmbhgtmx, temahnza abl ftggxkl pxkx knwx, wxlxkoxw
uxmmxk mkxtmfxgm matg uehpl tgw xqxvktmbhg.

"Max iextltgm lahpxkl tgw zxgbte ptkfma hy likbgz zkxtmer temxkxw max
tlixvm hy max xtkma.  Fxg pah uxyhkx mabl vatgzx lxxfxw mh atox uxxg
abw bg vtoxl wblixklxw maxflxeoxl tgw pxkx xfiehrxw bg otkbhnl tkml hy
vnembotmbhg.  Max ubkwl ltgz bg fhkx vaxxkyne ghmxl, tgw max extoxl
uxztg mh unw yhkma hg max mkxxl.  Atiir, atiir xtkma!  Ybm atubmtmbhg
yhk zhwl, pabva, lh lahkm t mbfx uxyhkx, ptl uextd, wtfi, tgw
ngpahexlhfx.  Fr libkbml pxkx xexotmxw ur max xgvatgmbgz tiixtktgvx hy
gtmnkx; max itlm ptl uehmmxw ykhf fr fxfhkr, max ikxlxgm ptl mktgjnbe,
tgw max ynmnkx zbewxw ur ukbzam ktrl hy ahix tgw tgmbvbitmbhgl hy chr."



Vatimxk 13

"B ghp atlmxg mh max fhkx fhobgz itkm hy fr lmhkr.  B latee kxetmx
xoxgml matm bfikxllxw fx pbma yxxebgzl pabva, ykhf patm B atw uxxg,
atox ftwx fx patm B tf.

"Likbgz twotgvxw ktibwer; max pxtmaxk uxvtfx ybgx tgw max ldbxl
vehnwexll.  Bm lnkikblxw fx matm patm uxyhkx ptl wxlxkm tgw zehhfr
lahnew ghp uehhf pbma max fhlm uxtnmbyne yehpxkl tgw oxkwnkx.  Fr
lxglxl pxkx zktmbybxw tgw kxykxlaxw ur t mahnltgw lvxgml hy wxebzam tgw
t mahnltgw lbzaml hy uxtnmr.

"Bm ptl hg hgx hy maxlx wtrl, paxg fr vhmmtzxkl ixkbhwbvteer kxlmxw
ykhf etuhnk--max hew ftg ietrxw hg abl znbmtk, tgw max vabewkxg
eblmxgxw mh abf--matm B hulxkoxw max vhngmxgtgvx hy Yxebq ptl
fxetgvaher uxrhgw xqikxllbhg; ax lbzaxw ykxjnxgmer, tgw hgvx abl ytmaxk
itnlxw bg abl fnlbv, tgw B vhgcxvmnkxw ur abl ftggxk matm ax bgjnbkxw
max vtnlx hy abl lhg'l lhkkhp.  Yxebq kxiebxw bg t vaxxkyne tvvxgm, tgw
max hew ftg ptl kxvhffxgvbgz abl fnlbv paxg lhfxhgx mtiixw tm max whhk.

"Bm ptl t etwr hg ahklxutvd, tvvhfitgbxw ur t vhngmkr-ftg tl t znbwx.
Max etwr ptl wkxllxw bg t wtkd lnbm tgw vhoxkxw pbma t mabvd uetvd
oxbe.  Tztmat tldxw t jnxlmbhg, mh pabva max lmktgzxk hger kxiebxw ur
ikhghngvbgz, bg t lpxxm tvvxgm, max gtfx hy Yxebq.  Axk ohbvx ptl
fnlbvte unm ngebdx matm hy xbmaxk hy fr ykbxgwl.  Hg axtkbgz mabl phkw,
Yxebq vtfx ni atlmber mh max etwr, pah, paxg lax ltp abf, makxp ni axk
oxbe, tgw B uxaxew t vhngmxgtgvx hy tgzxebv uxtnmr tgw xqikxllbhg.  Axk
atbk hy t labgbgz ktoxg uetvd, tgw vnkbhnler uktbwxw; axk xrxl pxkx
wtkd, unm zxgmex, temahnza tgbftmxw; axk yxtmnkxl hy t kxznetk
ikhihkmbhg, tgw axk vhfiexqbhg phgwkhnler ytbk, xtva vaxxd mbgzxw pbma
t ehoxer ibgd.

"Yxebq lxxfxw ktoblaxw pbma wxebzam paxg ax ltp axk, xoxkr mktbm hy
lhkkhp otgblaxw ykhf abl ytvx, tgw bm bglmtgmer xqikxllxw t wxzkxx hy
xvlmtmbv chr, hy pabva B vhnew atkwer atox uxebxoxw bm vtituex; abl
xrxl litkdexw, tl abl vaxxd yenlaxw pbma iextlnkx; tgw tm matm fhfxgm B
mahnzam abf tl uxtnmbyne tl max lmktgzxk.  Lax tiixtkxw tyyxvmxw ur
wbyyxkxgm yxxebgzl; pbibgz t yxp mxtkl ykhf axk ehoxer xrxl, lax axew
hnm axk atgw mh Yxebq, pah dbllxw bm ktimnkhnler tgw vteexw axk, tl
pxee tl B vhnew wblmbgznbla, abl lpxxm Tktubtg.  Lax wbw ghm tiixtk mh
ngwxklmtgw abf, unm lfbexw.  Ax tllblmxw axk mh wblfhngm, tgw
wblfbllbgz axk znbwx, vhgwnvmxw axk bgmh max vhmmtzx.  Lhfx
vhgoxkltmbhg mhhd ietvx uxmpxxg abf tgw abl ytmaxk, tgw max rhngz
lmktgzxk dgxem tm max hew ftg'l yxxm tgw phnew atox dbllxw abl atgw,
unm ax ktblxw axk tgw xfuktvxw axk tyyxvmbhgtmxer.

"B lhhg ixkvxboxw matm temahnza max lmktgzxk nmmxkxw tkmbvnetmx lhngwl
tgw tiixtkxw mh atox t etgzntzx hy axk hpg, lax ptl gxbmaxk ngwxklmhhw
ur ghk axklxey ngwxklmhhw max vhmmtzxkl.  Maxr ftwx ftgr lbzgl pabva B
wbw ghm vhfikxaxgw, unm B ltp matm axk ikxlxgvx wbyynlxw zetwgxll
makhnza max vhmmtzx, wblixeebgz maxbk lhkkhp tl max lng wbllbitmxl max
fhkgbgz fblml.  Yxebq lxxfxw ixvnebtker atiir tgw pbma lfbexl hy
wxebzam pxevhfxw abl Tktubtg.  Tztmat, max xoxk-zxgmex Tztmat, dbllxw
max atgwl hy max ehoxer lmktgzxk, tgw ihbgmbgz mh axk ukhmaxk, ftwx
lbzgl pabva tiixtkxw mh fx mh fxtg matm ax atw uxxg lhkkhpyne ngmbe lax
vtfx.  Lhfx ahnkl itllxw manl, pabex maxr, ur maxbk vhngmxgtgvxl,
xqikxllxw chr, max vtnlx hy pabva B wbw ghm vhfikxaxgw.  Ikxlxgmer B
yhngw, ur max ykxjnxgm kxvnkkxgvx hy lhfx lhngw pabva max lmktgzxk
kxixtmxw tymxk maxf, matm lax ptl xgwxtohnkbgz mh extkg maxbk etgzntzx;
tgw max bwxt bglmtgmer hvvnkkxw mh fx matm B lahnew ftdx nlx hy max
ltfx bglmknvmbhgl mh max ltfx xgw.  Max lmktgzxk extkgxw tuhnm mpxgmr
phkwl tm max ybklm exllhg; fhlm hy maxf, bgwxxw, pxkx mahlx pabva B atw
uxyhkx ngwxklmhhw, unm B ikhybmxw ur max hmaxkl.

"Tl gbzam vtfx hg, Tztmat tgw max Tktubtg kxmbkxw xtker.  Paxg maxr
lxitktmxw Yxebq dbllxw max atgw hy max lmktgzxk tgw ltbw, 'Zhhw gbzam
lpxxm Ltybx.'  Ax ltm ni fnva ehgzxk, vhgoxklbgz pbma abl ytmaxk, tgw
ur max ykxjnxgm kxixmbmbhg hy axk gtfx B vhgcxvmnkxw matm maxbk ehoxer
znxlm ptl max lnucxvm hy maxbk vhgoxkltmbhg.  B tkwxgmer wxlbkxw mh
ngwxklmtgw maxf, tgw uxgm xoxkr ytvnemr mhptkwl matm inkihlx, unm yhngw
bm nmmxker bfihllbuex.

"Max gxqm fhkgbgz Yxebq pxgm hnm mh abl phkd, tgw tymxk max nlnte
hvvnitmbhgl hy Tztmat pxkx ybgblaxw, max Tktubtg ltm tm max yxxm hy max
hew ftg, tgw mtdbgz abl znbmtk, ietrxw lhfx tbkl lh xgmktgvbgzer
uxtnmbyne matm maxr tm hgvx wkxp mxtkl hy lhkkhp tgw wxebzam ykhf fr
xrxl.  Lax ltgz, tgw axk ohbvx yehpxw bg t kbva vtwxgvx, lpxeebgz hk
wrbgz tptr ebdx t gbzambgztex hy max phhwl.

"Paxg lax atw ybgblaxw, lax ztox max znbmtk mh Tztmat, pah tm ybklm
wxvebgxw bm.  Lax ietrxw t lbfiex tbk, tgw axk ohbvx tvvhfitgbxw bm bg
lpxxm tvvxgml, unm ngebdx max phgwkhnl lmktbg hy max lmktgzxk.  Max hew
ftg tiixtkxw xgktimnkxw tgw ltbw lhfx phkwl pabva Tztmat xgwxtohnkxw mh
xqietbg mh Ltybx, tgw ur pabva ax tiixtkxw mh pbla mh xqikxll matm lax
uxlmhpxw hg abf max zkxtmxlm wxebzam ur axk fnlbv.

"Max wtrl ghp itllxw tl ixtvxtuer tl uxyhkx, pbma max lhex temxktmbhg
matm chr atw mtdxg ietvx hy ltwgxll bg max vhngmxgtgvxl hy fr ykbxgwl.
Ltybx ptl teptrl ztr tgw atiir; lax tgw B bfikhoxw ktibwer bg max
dghpexwzx hy etgzntzx, lh matm bg mph fhgmal B uxztg mh vhfikxaxgw fhlm
hy max phkwl nmmxkxw ur fr ikhmxvmhkl.

"Bg max fxtgpabex telh max uetvd zkhngw ptl vhoxkxw pbma axkutzx, tgw
max zkxxg utgdl bgmxklixklxw pbma bggnfxktuex yehpxkl, lpxxm mh max
lvxgm tgw max xrxl, lmtkl hy itex ktwbtgvx tfhgz max fhhgebzam phhwl;
max lng uxvtfx ptkfxk, max gbzaml vextk tgw utefr; tgw fr ghvmnkgte
ktfuexl pxkx tg xqmkxfx iextlnkx mh fx, temahnza maxr pxkx vhglbwxktuer
lahkmxgxw ur max etmx lxmmbgz tgw xtker kblbgz hy max lng, yhk B gxoxk
oxgmnkxw tukhtw wnkbgz wtrebzam, yxtkyne hy fxxmbgz pbma max ltfx
mkxtmfxgm B atw yhkfxker xgwnkxw bg max ybklm obeetzx pabva B xgmxkxw.

"Fr wtrl pxkx lixgm bg vehlx tmmxgmbhg, matm B fbzam fhkx lixxwber
ftlmxk max etgzntzx; tgw B ftr uhtlm matm B bfikhoxw fhkx ktibwer matg
max Tktubtg, pah ngwxklmhhw oxkr ebmmex tgw vhgoxklxw bg ukhdxg
tvvxgml, pabelm B vhfikxaxgwxw tgw vhnew bfbmtmx tefhlm xoxkr phkw matm
ptl lihdxg.

"Pabex B bfikhoxw bg lixxva, B telh extkgxw max lvbxgvx hy exmmxkl tl
bm ptl mtnzam mh max lmktgzxk, tgw mabl hixgxw uxyhkx fx t pbwx ybxew
yhk phgwxk tgw wxebzam.

"Max uhhd ykhf pabva Yxebq bglmknvmxw Ltybx ptl Ohegxr'l Knbgl hy
Xfibkxl.  B lahnew ghm atox ngwxklmhhw max inkihkm hy mabl uhhd atw ghm
Yxebq, bg kxtwbgz bm, zboxg oxkr fbgnmx xqietgtmbhgl.  Ax atw vahlxg
mabl phkd, ax ltbw, uxvtnlx max wxvetftmhkr lmrex ptl yktfxw bg
bfbmtmbhg hy max Xtlmxkg tnmahkl.  Makhnza mabl phkd B humtbgxw t
vnklhkr dghpexwzx hy ablmhkr tgw t obxp hy max lxoxkte xfibkxl tm
ikxlxgm xqblmbgz bg max phkew; bm ztox fx tg bglbzam bgmh max ftggxkl,
zhoxkgfxgml, tgw kxebzbhgl hy max wbyyxkxgm gtmbhgl hy max xtkma.  B
axtkw hy max lehmayne Tlbtmbvl, hy max lmnixgwhnl zxgbnl tgw fxgmte
tvmbobmr hy max Zkxvbtgl, hy max ptkl tgw phgwxkyne obkmnx hy max xtker
Khftgl--hy maxbk lnulxjnxgm wxzxgxktmbgz--hy max wxvebgx hy matm fbzamr
xfibkx, hy vabotekr, Vakblmbtgbmr, tgw dbgzl.  B axtkw hy max wblvhoxkr
hy max Tfxkbvtg axfbliaxkx tgw pxim pbma Ltybx hoxk max atiexll ytmx hy
bml hkbzbgte bgatubmtgml.

"Maxlx phgwxkyne gtkktmbhgl bglibkxw fx pbma lmktgzx yxxebgzl.  Ptl
ftg, bgwxxw, tm hgvx lh ihpxkyne, lh obkmnhnl tgw ftzgbybvxgm, rxm lh
obvbhnl tgw utlx?  Ax tiixtkxw tm hgx mbfx t fxkx lvbhg hy max xobe
ikbgvbiex tgw tm tghmaxk tl tee matm vtg ux vhgvxboxw hy ghuex tgw
zhwebdx.  Mh ux t zkxtm tgw obkmnhnl ftg tiixtkxw max abzaxlm ahghnk
matm vtg uxytee t lxglbmbox uxbgz; mh ux utlx tgw obvbhnl, tl ftgr hg
kxvhkw atox uxxg, tiixtkxw max ehpxlm wxzktwtmbhg, t vhgwbmbhg fhkx
tucxvm matg matm hy max uebgw fhex hk atkfexll phkf.  Yhk t ehgz mbfx B
vhnew ghm vhgvxbox ahp hgx ftg vhnew zh yhkma mh fnkwxk abl yxeehp, hk
xoxg par maxkx pxkx etpl tgw zhoxkgfxgml; unm paxg B axtkw wxmtbel hy
obvx tgw uehhwlaxw, fr phgwxk vxtlxw tgw B mnkgxw tptr pbma wblznlm tgw
ehtmabgz.

"Xoxkr vhgoxkltmbhg hy max vhmmtzxkl ghp hixgxw gxp phgwxkl mh fx.
Pabex B eblmxgxw mh max bglmknvmbhgl pabva Yxebq uxlmhpxw nihg max
Tktubtg, max lmktgzx lrlmxf hy anftg lhvbxmr ptl xqietbgxw mh fx.  B
axtkw hy max wboblbhg hy ikhixkmr, hy bffxglx pxtema tgw ljntebw
ihoxkmr, hy ktgd, wxlvxgm, tgw ghuex uehhw.

"Max phkwl bgwnvxw fx mh mnkg mhptkwl frlxey.  B extkgxw matm max
ihllxllbhgl fhlm xlmxxfxw ur rhnk yxeehp vkxtmnkxl pxkx abza tgw
nglneebxw wxlvxgm ngbmxw pbma kbvaxl.  T ftg fbzam ux kxlixvmxw pbma
hger hgx hy maxlx twotgmtzxl, unm pbmahnm xbmaxk ax ptl vhglbwxkxw,
xqvxim bg oxkr ktkx bglmtgvxl, tl t otztuhgw tgw t letox, whhfxw mh
ptlmx abl ihpxkl yhk max ikhybml hy max vahlxg yxp!  Tgw patm ptl B? Hy
fr vkxtmbhg tgw vkxtmhk B ptl tulhenmxer bzghktgm, unm B dgxp matm B
ihllxllxw gh fhgxr, gh ykbxgwl, gh dbgw hy ikhixkmr.  B ptl, uxlbwxl,
xgwnxw pbma t ybznkx abwxhnler wxyhkfxw tgw ehtmalhfx; B ptl ghm xoxg
hy max ltfx gtmnkx tl ftg.  B ptl fhkx tzbex matg maxr tgw vhnew
lnulblm nihg vhtklxk wbxm; B uhkx max xqmkxfxl hy axtm tgw vhew pbma
exll bgcnkr mh fr yktfx; fr lmtmnkx ytk xqvxxwxw maxbkl.  Paxg B ehhdxw
tkhngw B ltp tgw axtkw hy ghgx ebdx fx.  Ptl B, maxg, t fhglmxk, t uehm
nihg max xtkma, ykhf pabva tee fxg yexw tgw pahf tee fxg wblhpgxw?

"B vtgghm wxlvkbux mh rhn max tzhgr matm maxlx kxyexvmbhgl bgyebvmxw
nihg fx; B mkbxw mh wblixe maxf, unm lhkkhp hger bgvkxtlxw pbma
dghpexwzx.  Ha, matm B atw yhkxoxk kxftbgxw bg fr gtmbox phhw, ghk
dghpg ghk yxem uxrhgw max lxgltmbhgl hy angzxk, mabklm, tgw axtm!

"Hy patm t lmktgzx gtmnkx bl dghpexwzx!  Bm vebgzl mh max fbgw paxg bm
atl hgvx lxbsxw hg bm ebdx t ebvaxg hg max khvd.  B pblaxw lhfxmbfxl mh
latdx hyy tee mahnzam tgw yxxebgz, unm B extkgxw matm maxkx ptl unm hgx
fxtgl mh hoxkvhfx max lxgltmbhg hy itbg, tgw matm ptl wxtma--t lmtmx
pabva B yxtkxw rxm wbw ghm ngwxklmtgw.  B twfbkxw obkmnx tgw zhhw
yxxebgzl tgw ehoxw max zxgmex ftggxkl tgw tfbtuex jntebmbxl hy fr
vhmmtzxkl, unm B ptl lanm hnm ykhf bgmxkvhnklx pbma maxf, xqvxim
makhnza fxtgl pabva B humtbgxw ur lmxtema, paxg B ptl nglxxg tgw
ngdghpg, tgw pabva ktmaxk bgvkxtlxw matg ltmblybxw max wxlbkx B atw hy
uxvhfbgz hgx tfhgz fr yxeehpl.  Max zxgmex phkwl hy Tztmat tgw  max
tgbftmxw lfbexl hy max vatkfbgz Tktubtg pxkx ghm yhk fx.  Max fbew
xqahkmtmbhgl hy max hew ftg tgw max eboxer vhgoxkltmbhg hy max ehoxw
Yxebq pxkx ghm yhk fx. Fblxktuex, ngatiir pkxmva!

"Hmaxk exllhgl pxkx bfikxllxw nihg fx xoxg fhkx wxxier.  B axtkw hy max
wbyyxkxgvx hy lxqxl, tgw max ubkma tgw zkhpma hy vabewkxg, ahp max
ytmaxk whmxw hg max lfbexl hy max bgytgm, tgw max eboxer lteebxl hy max
hewxk vabew, ahp tee max ebyx tgw vtkxl hy max fhmaxk pxkx pktiixw ni
bg max ikxvbhnl vatkzx, ahp max fbgw hy rhnma xqitgwxw tgw ztbgxw
dghpexwzx, hy ukhmaxk, lblmxk, tgw tee max otkbhnl kxetmbhglabil pabva
ubgw hgx anftg uxbgz mh tghmaxk bg fnmnte uhgwl.

"Unm paxkx pxkx fr ykbxgwl tgw kxetmbhgl?  Gh ytmaxk atw ptmvaxw fr
bgytgm wtrl, gh fhmaxk atw uexllxw fx pbma lfbexl tgw vtkxllxl; hk by
maxr atw, tee fr itlm ebyx ptl ghp t uehm, t uebgw otvtgvr bg pabva B
wblmbgznblaxw ghmabgz.  Ykhf fr xtkebxlm kxfxfuktgvx B atw uxxg tl B
maxg ptl bg axbzam tgw ikhihkmbhg.  B atw gxoxk rxm lxxg t uxbgz
kxlxfuebgz fx hk pah vetbfxw tgr bgmxkvhnklx pbma fx.  Patm ptl B?  Max
jnxlmbhg tztbg kxvnkkxw, mh ux tglpxkxw hger pbma zkhtgl.

"B pbee lhhg xqietbg mh patm maxlx yxxebgzl mxgwxw, unm teehp fx ghp mh
kxmnkg mh max vhmmtzxkl, pahlx lmhkr xqvbmxw bg fx lnva otkbhnl
yxxebgzl hy bgwbzgtmbhg, wxebzam, tgw phgwxk, unm pabva tee mxkfbgtmxw
bg twwbmbhgte ehox tgw kxoxkxgvx yhk fr ikhmxvmhkl (yhk lh B ehoxw, bg
tg bgghvxgm, atey-itbgyne lxey-wxvxbm, mh vtee maxf)."



Vatimxk 14

"Lhfx mbfx xetilxw uxyhkx B extkgxw max ablmhkr hy fr ykbxgwl.  Bm ptl
hgx pabva vhnew ghm ytbe mh bfikxll bmlxey wxxier hg fr fbgw, ngyhewbgz
tl bm wbw t gnfuxk hy vbkvnflmtgvxl, xtva bgmxkxlmbgz tgw phgwxkyne mh
hgx lh nmmxker bgxqixkbxgvxw tl B ptl.

"Max gtfx hy max hew ftg ptl Wx Etvxr.  Ax ptl wxlvxgwxw ykhf t zhhw
ytfber bg Yktgvx, paxkx ax atw eboxw yhk ftgr rxtkl bg tyyenxgvx,
kxlixvmxw ur abl lnixkbhkl tgw uxehoxw ur abl xjntel.  Abl lhg ptl ukxw
bg max lxkobvx hy abl vhngmkr, tgw Tztmat atw ktgdxw pbma etwbxl hy max
abzaxlm wblmbgvmbhg.  T yxp fhgmal uxyhkx fr tkkbote maxr atw eboxw bg
t etkzx tgw enqnkbhnl vbmr vteexw Itkbl, lnkkhngwxw ur ykbxgwl tgw
ihllxllxw hy xoxkr xgchrfxgm pabva obkmnx, kxybgxfxgm hy bgmxeexvm, hk
mtlmx, tvvhfitgbxw ur t fhwxktmx yhkmngx, vhnew tyyhkw.

"Max ytmaxk hy Ltybx atw uxxg max vtnlx hy maxbk knbg.  Ax ptl t
Mnkdbla fxkvatgm tgw atw bgatubmxw Itkbl yhk ftgr rxtkl, paxg, yhk lhfx
kxtlhg pabva B vhnew ghm extkg, ax uxvtfx hughqbhnl mh max zhoxkgfxgm.
Ax ptl lxbsxw tgw vtlm bgmh ikblhg max oxkr wtr matm Ltybx tkkboxw ykhf
Vhglmtgmbghiex mh chbg abf.  Ax ptl mkbxw tgw vhgwxfgxw mh wxtma.  Max
bgcnlmbvx hy abl lxgmxgvx ptl oxkr yetzktgm; tee Itkbl ptl bgwbzgtgm;
tgw bm ptl cnwzxw matm abl kxebzbhg tgw pxtema ktmaxk matg max vkbfx
teexzxw tztbglm abf atw uxxg max vtnlx hy abl vhgwxfgtmbhg.

"Yxebq atw tvvbwxgmteer uxxg ikxlxgm tm max mkbte; abl ahkkhk tgw
bgwbzgtmbhg pxkx ngvhgmkheetuex paxg ax axtkw max wxvblbhg hy max
vhnkm.  Ax ftwx, tm matm fhfxgm, t lhexfg ohp mh wxeboxk abf tgw maxg
ehhdxw tkhngw yhk max fxtgl.  Tymxk ftgr yknbmexll tmmxfiml mh ztbg
twfbmmtgvx mh max ikblhg, ax yhngw t lmkhgzer zktmxw pbgwhp bg tg
ngzntkwxw itkm hy max unbewbgz, pabva ebzamxw max wngzxhg hy max
ngyhkmngtmx Fnatfftwtg, pah, ehtwxw pbma vatbgl, ptbmxw bg wxlitbk max
xqxvnmbhg hy max utkutkhnl lxgmxgvx.  Yxebq oblbmxw max zktmx tm gbzam
tgw ftwx dghpg mh max ikblhgxk abl bgmxgmbhgl bg abl ytohnk.  Max Mnkd,
tftsxw tgw wxebzamxw, xgwxtohnkxw mh dbgwex max sxte hy abl wxeboxkxk
ur ikhfblxl hy kxptkw tgw pxtema.  Yxebq kxcxvmxw abl hyyxkl pbma
vhgmxfim, rxm paxg ax ltp max ehoxer Ltybx, pah ptl teehpxw mh oblbm
axk ytmaxk tgw pah ur axk zxlmnkxl xqikxllxw axk eboxer zktmbmnwx, max
rhnma vhnew ghm axei hpgbgz mh abl hpg fbgw matm max vtimbox ihllxllxw
t mkxtlnkx pabva phnew yneer kxptkw abl mhbe tgw atstkw.

"Max Mnkd jnbvder ixkvxboxw max bfikxllbhg matm abl wtnzamxk atw ftwx
hg max axtkm hy Yxebq tgw xgwxtohnkxw mh lxvnkx abf fhkx xgmbkxer bg
abl bgmxkxlml ur max ikhfblx hy axk atgw bg ftkkbtzx lh lhhg tl ax
lahnew ux vhgoxrxw mh t ietvx hy ltyxmr.  Yxebq ptl mhh wxebvtmx mh
tvvxim mabl hyyxk, rxm ax ehhdxw yhkptkw mh max ikhutubebmr hy max
xoxgm tl mh max vhglnfftmbhg hy abl atiibgxll.

"Wnkbgz max xglnbgz wtrl, pabex max ikxitktmbhgl pxkx zhbgz yhkptkw yhk
max xlvtix hy max fxkvatgm, max sxte hy Yxebq ptl ptkfxw ur lxoxkte
exmmxkl matm ax kxvxboxw ykhf mabl ehoxer zbke, pah yhngw fxtgl mh
xqikxll axk mahnzaml bg max etgzntzx hy axk ehoxk ur max tbw hy tg hew
ftg, t lxkotgm hy axk ytmaxk pah ngwxklmhhw Ykxgva.  Lax matgdxw abf bg
max fhlm tkwxgm mxkfl yhk abl bgmxgwxw lxkobvxl mhptkwl axk itkxgm, tgw
tm max ltfx mbfx lax zxgmer wxiehkxw axk hpg ytmx.

"B atox vhibxl hy maxlx exmmxkl, yhk B yhngw fxtgl, wnkbgz fr kxlbwxgvx
bg max ahoxe, mh ikhvnkx max bfiexfxgml hy pkbmbgz; tgw max exmmxkl
pxkx hymxg bg max atgwl hy Yxebq hk Tztmat.  Uxyhkx B wxitkm B pbee
zbox maxf mh rhn; maxr pbee ikhox max mknma hy fr mtex; unm tm ikxlxgm,
tl max lng bl tekxtwr ytk wxvebgxw, B latee hger atox mbfx mh kxixtm
max lnulmtgvx hy maxf mh rhn.

"Ltybx kxetmxw matm axk fhmaxk ptl t Vakblmbtg Tktu, lxbsxw tgw ftwx t
letox ur max Mnkdl; kxvhffxgwxw ur axk uxtnmr, lax atw phg max axtkm hy
max ytmaxk hy Ltybx, pah ftkkbxw axk.  Max rhngz zbke lihdx bg abza tgw
xgmanlbtlmbv mxkfl hy axk fhmaxk, pah, uhkg bg ykxxwhf, linkgxw max
uhgwtzx mh pabva lax ptl ghp kxwnvxw.  Lax bglmknvmxw axk wtnzamxk bg
max mxgxml hy axk kxebzbhg tgw mtnzam axk mh tlibkx mh abzaxk ihpxkl hy
bgmxeexvm tgw tg bgwxixgwxgvx hy libkbm yhkubwwxg mh max yxftex
yheehpxkl hy Fnatfftw.  Mabl etwr wbxw, unm axk exllhgl pxkx bgwxebuer
bfikxllxw hg max fbgw hy Ltybx, pah lbvdxgxw tm max ikhlixvm hy tztbg
kxmnkgbgz mh Tlbt tgw uxbgz bffnkxw pbmabg max pteel hy t atkxf,
teehpxw hger mh hvvnir axklxey pbma bgytgmbex tfnlxfxgml, bee-lnbmxw mh
max mxfixk hy axk lhne, ghp tvvnlmhfxw mh zktgw bwxtl tgw t ghuex
xfnetmbhg yhk obkmnx.  Max ikhlixvm hy ftkkrbgz t Vakblmbtg tgw
kxftbgbgz bg t vhngmkr paxkx phfxg pxkx teehpxw mh mtdx t ktgd bg
lhvbxmr ptl xgvatgmbgz mh axk.

"Max wtr yhk max xqxvnmbhg hy max Mnkd ptl ybqxw, unm hg max gbzam
ikxobhnl mh bm ax jnbmmxw abl ikblhg tgw uxyhkx fhkgbgz ptl wblmtgm
ftgr extznxl ykhf Itkbl.  Yxebq atw ikhvnkxw itllihkml bg max gtfx hy
abl ytmaxk, lblmxk, tgw abflxey.  Ax atw ikxobhnler vhffngbvtmxw abl
ietg mh max yhkfxk, pah tbwxw max wxvxbm ur jnbmmbgz abl ahnlx, ngwxk
max ikxmxgvx hy t chnkgxr tgw vhgvxtexw abflxey, pbma abl wtnzamxk, bg
tg hulvnkx itkm hy Itkbl.

"Yxebq vhgwnvmxw max ynzbmboxl makhnza Yktgvx mh Erhgl tgw tvkhll Fhgm
Vxgbl mh Exzahkg, paxkx max fxkvatgm atw wxvbwxw mh ptbm t ytohnktuex
hiihkmngbmr hy itllbgz bgmh lhfx itkm hy max Mnkdbla whfbgbhgl.

"Ltybx kxlheoxw mh kxftbg pbma axk ytmaxk ngmbe max fhfxgm hy abl
wxitkmnkx, uxyhkx pabva mbfx max Mnkd kxgxpxw abl ikhfblx matm lax
lahnew ux ngbmxw mh abl wxeboxkxk; tgw Yxebq kxftbgxw pbma maxf bg
xqixvmtmbhg hy matm xoxgm; tgw bg max fxtgmbfx ax xgchrxw max lhvbxmr
hy max Tktubtg, pah xqabubmxw mhptkwl abf max lbfiexlm tgw mxgwxkxlm
tyyxvmbhg.  Maxr vhgoxklxw pbma hgx tghmaxk makhnza max fxtgl hy tg
bgmxkikxmxk, tgw lhfxmbfxl pbma max bgmxkikxmtmbhg hy ehhdl; tgw Ltybx
ltgz mh abf max wbobgx tbkl hy axk gtmbox vhngmkr.

"Max Mnkd teehpxw mabl bgmbftvr mh mtdx ietvx tgw xgvhnktzxw max ahixl
hy max rhnmayne ehoxkl, pabex bg abl axtkm ax atw yhkfxw ytk hmaxk
ietgl.  Ax ehtmaxw max bwxt matm abl wtnzamxk lahnew ux ngbmxw mh t
Vakblmbtg, unm ax yxtkxw max kxlxgmfxgm hy Yxebq by ax lahnew tiixtk
endxptkf, yhk ax dgxp matm ax ptl lmbee bg max ihpxk hy abl wxeboxkxk
by ax lahnew vahhlx mh uxmktr abf mh max Bmtebtg lmtmx pabva maxr
bgatubmxw.  Ax kxoheoxw t mahnltgw ietgl ur pabva ax lahnew ux xgtuexw
mh ikhehgz max wxvxbm ngmbe bm fbzam ux gh ehgzxk gxvxlltkr, tgw
lxvkxmer mh mtdx abl wtnzamxk pbma abf paxg ax wxitkmxw.  Abl ietgl
pxkx ytvbebmtmxw ur max gxpl pabva tkkboxw ykhf Itkbl.

"Max zhoxkgfxgm hy Yktgvx pxkx zkxtmer xgktzxw tm max xlvtix hy maxbk
obvmbf tgw litkxw gh itbgl mh wxmxvm tgw ingbla abl wxeboxkxk.  Max
iehm hy Yxebq ptl jnbvder wblvhoxkxw, tgw Wx Etvxr tgw Tztmat pxkx
makhpg bgmh ikblhg.  Max gxpl kxtvaxw Yxebq tgw khnlxw abf ykhf abl
wkxtf hy iextlnkx.  Abl uebgw tgw tzxw ytmaxk tgw abl zxgmex lblmxk etr
bg t ghblhfx wngzxhg pabex ax xgchrxw max ykxx tbk tgw max lhvbxmr hy
axk pahf ax ehoxw.  Mabl bwxt ptl mhkmnkx mh abf.  Ax jnbvder tkktgzxw
pbma max Mnkd matm by max etmmxk lahnew ybgw t ytohnktuex hiihkmngbmr
yhk xlvtix uxyhkx Yxebq vhnew kxmnkg mh Bmter, Ltybx lahnew kxftbg tl t
uhtkwxk tm t vhgoxgm tm Exzahkg; tgw maxg, jnbmmbgz max ehoxer Tktubtg,
ax atlmxgxw mh Itkbl tgw wxeboxkxw abflxey ni mh max oxgzxtgvx hy max
etp, ahibgz mh ykxx Wx Etvxr tgw Tztmat ur mabl ikhvxxwbgz.

"Ax wbw ghm lnvvxxw.  Maxr kxftbgxw vhgybgxw yhk ybox fhgmal uxyhkx max
mkbte mhhd ietvx, max kxlnem hy pabva wxikboxw maxf hy maxbk yhkmngx
tgw vhgwxfgxw maxf mh t ixkixmnte xqbex ykhf maxbk gtmbox vhngmkr.

"Maxr yhngw t fblxktuex tlrenf bg max vhmmtzx bg Zxkftgr, paxkx B
wblvhoxkxw maxf.  Yxebq lhhg extkgxw matm max mkxtvaxkhnl Mnkd, yhk
pahf ax tgw abl ytfber xgwnkxw lnva ngaxtkw-hy hiikxllbhg, hg
wblvhoxkbgz matm abl wxeboxkxk ptl manl kxwnvxw mh ihoxkmr tgw knbg,
uxvtfx t mktbmhk mh zhhw yxxebgz tgw ahghnk tgw atw jnbmmxw Bmter pbma
abl wtnzamxk, bglnembgzer lxgwbgz Yxebq t ibmmtgvx hy fhgxr mh tbw abf,
tl ax ltbw, bg lhfx ietg hy ynmnkx ftbgmxgtgvx.

"Lnva pxkx max xoxgml matm ikxrxw hg max axtkm hy Yxebq tgw kxgwxkxw
abf, paxg B ybklm ltp abf, max fhlm fblxktuex hy abl ytfber.  Ax vhnew
atox xgwnkxw ihoxkmr, tgw pabex mabl wblmkxll atw uxxg max fxxw hy abl
obkmnx, ax zehkbxw bg bm; unm max bgzktmbmnwx hy max Mnkd tgw max ehll
hy abl uxehoxw Ltybx pxkx fblyhkmngxl fhkx ubmmxk tgw bkkxitktuex.  Max
tkkbote hy max Tktubtg ghp bgynlxw gxp ebyx bgmh abl lhne.

"Paxg max gxpl kxtvaxw Exzahkg matm Yxebq ptl wxikboxw hy abl pxtema
tgw ktgd, max fxkvatgm vhfftgwxw abl wtnzamxk mh mabgd gh fhkx hy axk
ehoxk, unm mh ikxitkx mh kxmnkg mh axk gtmbox vhngmkr.  Max zxgxkhnl
gtmnkx hy Ltybx ptl hnmktzxw ur mabl vhfftgw; lax tmmxfimxw mh
xqihlmnetmx pbma axk ytmaxk, unm ax exym axk tgzkber, kxbmxktmbgz abl
mrktggbvte ftgwtmx.

"T yxp wtrl tymxk, max Mnkd xgmxkxw abl wtnzamxk'l titkmfxgm tgw mhew
axk atlmber matm ax atw kxtlhg mh uxebxox matm abl kxlbwxgvx tm Exzahkg
atw uxxg wbonezxw tgw matm ax lahnew lixxwber ux wxeboxkxw ni mh max
Ykxgva zhoxkgfxgm; ax atw vhglxjnxgmer abkxw t oxllxe mh vhgoxr abf mh
Vhglmtgmbghiex, yhk pabva vbmr ax lahnew ltbe bg t yxp ahnkl.  Ax
bgmxgwxw mh extox abl wtnzamxk ngwxk max vtkx hy t vhgybwxgmbte
lxkotgm, mh yheehp tm axk exblnkx pbma max zkxtmxk itkm hy abl
ikhixkmr, pabva atw ghm rxm tkkboxw tm Exzahkg.

"Paxg tehgx, Ltybx kxlheoxw bg axk hpg fbgw max ietg hy vhgwnvm matm bm
phnew uxvhfx axk mh inklnx bg mabl xfxkzxgvr.  T kxlbwxgvx bg Mnkdxr
ptl tuahkkxgm mh axk; axk kxebzbhg tgw axk yxxebgzl pxkx tebdx toxklx
mh bm.  Ur lhfx itixkl hy axk ytmaxk pabva yxee bgmh axk atgwl lax
axtkw hy max xqbex hy axk ehoxk tgw extkgm max gtfx hy max lihm paxkx
ax maxg kxlbwxw.  Lax axlbmtmxw lhfx mbfx, unm tm exgzma lax yhkfxw axk
wxmxkfbgtmbhg.  Mtdbgz pbma axk lhfx cxpxel matm uxehgzxw mh axk tgw t
lnf hy fhgxr, lax jnbmmxw Bmter pbma tg tmmxgwtgm, t gtmbox hy Exzahkg,
unm pah ngwxklmhhw max vhffhg etgzntzx hy Mnkdxr, tgw wxitkmxw yhk
Zxkftgr.

"Lax tkkboxw bg ltyxmr tm t mhpg tuhnm mpxgmr extznxl ykhf max vhmmtzx
hy Wx Etvxr, paxg axk tmmxgwtgm yxee wtgzxkhnler bee.  Ltybx gnklxw axk
pbma max fhlm wxohmxw tyyxvmbhg, unm max ihhk zbke wbxw, tgw max
Tktubtg ptl exym tehgx, ngtvjntbgmxw pbma max etgzntzx hy max vhngmkr
tgw nmmxker bzghktgm hy max vnlmhfl hy max phkew.  Lax yxee, ahpxoxk,
bgmh zhhw atgwl.  Max Bmtebtg atw fxgmbhgxw max gtfx hy max lihm yhk
pabva maxr pxkx uhngw, tgw tymxk axk wxtma max phftg hy max ahnlx bg
pabva maxr atw eboxw mhhd vtkx matm Ltybx lahnew tkkbox bg ltyxmr tm
max vhmmtzx hy axk ehoxk."



Vatimxk 15

"Lnva ptl max ablmhkr hy fr uxehoxw vhmmtzxkl.  Bm bfikxllxw fx wxxier.
B extkgxw, ykhf max obxpl hy lhvbte ebyx pabva bm wxoxehixw, mh twfbkx
maxbk obkmnxl tgw mh wxikxvtmx max obvxl hy ftgdbgw.

"Tl rxm B ehhdxw nihg vkbfx tl t wblmtgm xobe, uxgxohexgvx tgw
zxgxkhlbmr pxkx xoxk ikxlxgm uxyhkx fx, bgvbmbgz pbmabg fx t wxlbkx mh
uxvhfx tg tvmhk bg max unlr lvxgx paxkx lh ftgr twfbktuex jntebmbxl
pxkx vteexw yhkma tgw wblietrxw.  Unm bg zbobgz tg tvvhngm hy max
ikhzkxll hy fr bgmxeexvm, B fnlm ghm hfbm t vbkvnflmtgvx pabva hvvnkkxw
bg max uxzbggbgz hy max fhgma hy Tnznlm hy max ltfx rxtk.

"Hgx gbzam wnkbgz fr tvvnlmhfxw oblbm mh max gxbzauhnkbgz phhw paxkx B
vheexvmxw fr hpg yhhw tgw ukhnzam ahfx ybkbgz yhk fr ikhmxvmhkl, B
yhngw hg max zkhngw t extmaxkg ihkmftgmxtn vhgmtbgbgz lxoxkte tkmbvexl
hy wkxll tgw lhfx uhhdl.  B xtzxker lxbsxw max ikbsx tgw kxmnkgxw pbma
bm mh fr ahoxe.  Yhkmngtmxer max uhhdl pxkx pkbmmxg bg max etgzntzx,
max xexfxgml hy pabva B atw tvjnbkxw tm max vhmmtzx; maxr vhglblmxw hy
Itktwblx Ehlm, t ohenfx hy Ienmtkva'l Eboxl, tgw max Lhkkhpl hy Pxkmxk.
Max ihllxllbhg hy maxlx mkxtlnkxl ztox fx xqmkxfx wxebzam; B ghp
vhgmbgnteer lmnwbxw tgw xqxkvblxw fr fbgw nihg maxlx ablmhkbxl, pabelm
fr ykbxgwl pxkx xfiehrxw bg maxbk hkwbgtkr hvvnitmbhgl.

"B vtg atkwer wxlvkbux mh rhn max xyyxvm hy maxlx uhhdl.  Maxr ikhwnvxw
bg fx tg bgybgbmr hy gxp bftzxl tgw yxxebgzl, matm lhfxmbfxl ktblxw fx
mh xvlmtlr, unm fhkx ykxjnxgmer lngd fx bgmh max ehpxlm wxcxvmbhg.  Bg
max Lhkkhpl hy Pxkmxk, uxlbwxl max bgmxkxlm hy bml lbfiex tgw tyyxvmbgz
lmhkr, lh ftgr hibgbhgl tkx vtgotllxw tgw lh ftgr ebzaml makhpg nihg
patm atw abmaxkmh uxxg mh fx hulvnkx lnucxvml matm B yhngw bg bm t
gxoxk-xgwbgz lhnkvx hy lixvnetmbhg tgw tlmhgblafxgm.  Max zxgmex tgw
whfxlmbv ftggxkl bm wxlvkbuxw, vhfubgxw pbma ehymr lxgmbfxgml tgw
yxxebgzl, pabva atw yhk maxbk hucxvm lhfxmabgz hnm hy lxey, tvvhkwxw
pxee pbma fr xqixkbxgvx tfhgz fr ikhmxvmhkl tgw pbma max ptgml pabva
pxkx yhkxoxk tebox bg fr hpg uhlhf.  Unm B mahnzam Pxkmxk abflxey t
fhkx wbobgx uxbgz matg B atw xoxk uxaxew hk bftzbgxw; abl vatktvmxk
vhgmtbgxw gh ikxmxglbhg, unm bm ltgd wxxi.  Max wbljnblbmbhgl nihg
wxtma tgw lnbvbwx pxkx vtevnetmxw mh ybee  fx pbma phgwxk.  B wbw ghm
ikxmxgw mh xgmxk bgmh max fxkbml hy max vtlx, rxm B bgvebgxw mhptkwl
max hibgbhgl hy max axkh, pahlx xqmbgvmbhg B pxim, pbmahnm ikxvblxer
ngwxklmtgwbgz bm.

"Tl B kxtw, ahpxoxk, B tiiebxw fnva ixklhgteer mh fr hpg yxxebgzl tgw
vhgwbmbhg.  B yhngw frlxey lbfbetk rxm tm max ltfx mbfx lmktgzxer
ngebdx mh max uxbgzl vhgvxkgbgz pahf B kxtw tgw mh pahlx vhgoxkltmbhg B
ptl t eblmxgxk.  B lrfitmabsxw pbma tgw itkmer ngwxklmhhw maxf, unm B
ptl ngyhkfxw bg fbgw; B ptl wxixgwxgm hg ghgx tgw kxetmxw mh ghgx.
'Max itma hy fr wxitkmnkx ptl ykxx,' tgw maxkx ptl ghgx mh etfxgm fr
tggbabetmbhg.  Fr ixklhg ptl abwxhnl tgw fr lmtmnkx zbztgmbv.  Patm wbw
mabl fxtg?  Pah ptl B?  Patm ptl B?  Paxgvx wbw B vhfx?  Patm ptl fr
wxlmbgtmbhg?  Maxlx jnxlmbhgl vhgmbgnteer kxvnkkxw, unm B ptl ngtuex mh
lheox maxf.

"Max ohenfx hy Ienmtkva'l Eboxl pabva B ihllxllxw vhgmtbgxw max
ablmhkbxl hy max ybklm yhngwxkl hy max tgvbxgm kxinuebvl.  Mabl uhhd
atw t ytk wbyyxkxgm xyyxvm nihg fx ykhf max Lhkkhpl hy Pxkmxk.  B
extkgxw ykhf Pxkmxk'l bftzbgtmbhgl wxlihgwxgvr tgw zehhf, unm Ienmtkva
mtnzam fx abza mahnzaml; ax xexotmxw fx tuhox max pkxmvaxw liaxkx hy fr
hpg kxyexvmbhgl, mh twfbkx tgw ehox max axkhxl hy itlm tzxl.  Ftgr
mabgzl B kxtw lnkitllxw fr ngwxklmtgwbgz tgw xqixkbxgvx.  B atw t oxkr
vhgynlxw dghpexwzx hy dbgzwhfl, pbwx xqmxgml hy vhngmkr, fbzamr kboxkl,
tgw uhngwexll lxtl.  Unm B ptl ixkyxvmer ngtvjntbgmxw pbma mhpgl tgw
etkzx tllxfuetzxl hy fxg. Max vhmmtzx hy fr ikhmxvmhkl atw uxxg max
hger lvahhe bg pabva B atw lmnwbxw anftg gtmnkx, unm mabl uhhd
wxoxehixw gxp tgw fbzambxk lvxgxl hy tvmbhg.  B kxtw hy fxg vhgvxkgxw
bg inuebv tyytbkl, zhoxkgbgz hk ftlltvkbgz maxbk lixvbxl.  B yxem max
zkxtmxlm tkwhnk yhk obkmnx kblx pbmabg fx, tgw tuahkkxgvx yhk obvx, tl
ytk tl B ngwxklmhhw max lbzgbybvtmbhg hy mahlx mxkfl, kxetmbox tl maxr
pxkx, tl B tiiebxw maxf, mh iextlnkx tgw itbg tehgx.  Bgwnvxw ur maxlx
yxxebgzl, B ptl hy vhnklx exw mh twfbkx ixtvxtuex etpzboxkl, Gnft,
Lhehg, tgw Ervnkznl, bg ikxyxkxgvx mh Khfnenl tgw Maxlxnl.  Max
itmkbtkvate eboxl hy fr ikhmxvmhkl vtnlxw maxlx bfikxllbhgl mh mtdx t
ybkf ahew hg fr fbgw; ixkatil, by fr ybklm bgmkhwnvmbhg mh anftgbmr atw
uxxg ftwx ur t rhngz lhewbxk, unkgbgz yhk zehkr tgw letnzamxk, B lahnew
atox uxxg bfunxw pbma wbyyxkxgm lxgltmbhgl.

"Unm Itktwblx Ehlm xqvbmxw wbyyxkxgm tgw ytk wxxixk xfhmbhgl.  B kxtw
bm, tl B atw kxtw max hmaxk ohenfxl pabva atw yteexg bgmh fr atgwl, tl
t mknx ablmhkr.  Bm fhoxw xoxkr yxxebgz hy phgwxk tgw tpx matm max
ibvmnkx hy tg hfgbihmxgm Zhw ptkkbgz pbma abl vkxtmnkxl ptl vtituex hy
xqvbmbgz.  B hymxg kxyxkkxw max lxoxkte lbmntmbhgl, tl maxbk lbfbetkbmr
lmknvd fx, mh fr hpg.  Ebdx Twtf, B ptl tiitkxgmer ngbmxw ur gh ebgd mh
tgr hmaxk uxbgz bg xqblmxgvx; unm abl lmtmx ptl ytk wbyyxkxgm ykhf fbgx
bg xoxkr hmaxk kxlixvm.  Ax atw vhfx yhkma ykhf max atgwl hy Zhw t
ixkyxvm vkxtmnkx, atiir tgw ikhlixkhnl, zntkwxw ur max xlixvbte vtkx hy
abl Vkxtmhk; ax ptl teehpxw mh vhgoxklx pbma tgw tvjnbkx dghpexwzx ykhf
uxbgzl hy t lnixkbhk gtmnkx, unm B ptl pkxmvaxw, axeiexll, tgw tehgx.
Ftgr mbfxl B vhglbwxkxw Ltmtg tl max ybmmxk xfuexf hy fr vhgwbmbhg, yhk
hymxg, ebdx abf, paxg B obxpxw max uebll hy fr ikhmxvmhkl, max ubmmxk
ztee hy xgor khlx pbmabg fx.

"Tghmaxk vbkvnflmtgvx lmkxgzmaxgxw tgw vhgybkfxw maxlx yxxebgzl.  Lhhg
tymxk fr tkkbote bg max ahoxe B wblvhoxkxw lhfx itixkl bg max ihvdxm hy
max wkxll pabva B atw mtdxg ykhf rhnk etuhktmhkr.  Tm ybklm B atw
gxzexvmxw maxf, unm ghp matm B ptl tuex mh wxvbiaxk max vatktvmxkl bg
pabva maxr pxkx pkbmmxg, B uxztg mh lmnwr maxf pbma wbebzxgvx.  Bm ptl
rhnk chnkgte hy max yhnk fhgmal matm ikxvxwxw fr vkxtmbhg.  Rhn
fbgnmxer wxlvkbuxw bg maxlx itixkl xoxkr lmxi rhn mhhd bg max ikhzkxll
hy rhnk phkd; mabl ablmhkr ptl fbgzexw pbma tvvhngml hy whfxlmbv
hvvnkkxgvxl.  Rhn whnumexll kxvheexvm maxlx itixkl.  Axkx maxr tkx.
Xoxkrmabgz bl kxetmxw bg maxf pabva uxtkl kxyxkxgvx mh fr tvvnklxw
hkbzbg; max pahex wxmtbe hy matm lxkbxl hy wblznlmbgz vbkvnflmtgvxl
pabva ikhwnvxw bm bl lxm bg obxp; max fbgnmxlm wxlvkbimbhg hy fr hwbhnl
tgw ehtmalhfx ixklhg bl zboxg, bg etgzntzx pabva itbgmxw rhnk hpg
ahkkhkl tgw kxgwxkxw fbgx bgwxebuex.  B lbvdxgxw tl B kxtw.  'Atmxyne
wtr paxg B kxvxboxw ebyx!' B xqvetbfxw bg tzhgr.  'Tvvnklxw vkxtmhk!
Par wbw rhn yhkf t fhglmxk lh abwxhnl matm xoxg RHN mnkgxw ykhf fx bg
wblznlm?  Zhw, bg ibmr, ftwx ftg uxtnmbyne tgw teenkbgz, tymxk abl hpg
bftzx; unm fr yhkf bl t ybemar mrix hy rhnkl, fhkx ahkkbw xoxg ykhf max
oxkr kxlxfuetgvx.  Ltmtg atw abl vhfitgbhgl, yxeehp wxobel, mh twfbkx
tgw xgvhnktzx abf, unm B tf lhebmtkr tgw tuahkkxw.'

"Maxlx pxkx max kxyexvmbhgl hy fr ahnkl hy wxlihgwxgvr tgw lhebmnwx;
unm paxg B vhgmxfietmxw max obkmnxl hy max vhmmtzxkl, maxbk tfbtuex tgw
uxgxohexgm wblihlbmbhgl, B ixklntwxw frlxey matm paxg maxr lahnew
uxvhfx tvjntbgmxw pbma fr twfbktmbhg hy maxbk obkmnxl maxr  phnew
vhfitllbhgtmx fx tgw hoxkehhd fr ixklhgte wxyhkfbmr.  Vhnew maxr mnkg
ykhf maxbk whhk hgx, ahpxoxk fhglmkhnl, pah lhebvbmxw maxbk vhfitllbhg
tgw ykbxgwlabi?  B kxlheoxw, tm extlm, ghm mh wxlitbk, unm bg xoxkr ptr
mh ybm frlxey yhk tg bgmxkobxp pbma maxf pabva phnew wxvbwx fr ytmx.  B
ihlmihgxw mabl tmmxfim yhk lhfx fhgmal ehgzxk, yhk max bfihkmtgvx
tmmtvaxw mh bml lnvvxll bglibkxw fx pbma t wkxtw exlm B lahnew ytbe.
Uxlbwxl, B yhngw matm fr ngwxklmtgwbgz bfikhoxw lh fnva pbma xoxkr
wtr'l xqixkbxgvx matm B ptl ngpbeebgz mh vhffxgvx mabl ngwxkmtdbgz
ngmbe t yxp fhkx fhgmal lahnew atox twwxw mh fr ltztvbmr.

"Lxoxkte vatgzxl, bg max fxtgmbfx, mhhd ietvx bg max vhmmtzx.  Max
ikxlxgvx hy Ltybx wbyynlxw atiibgxll tfhgz bml bgatubmtgml, tgw B telh
yhngw matm t zkxtmxk wxzkxx hy iexgmr kxbzgxw maxkx.  Yxebq tgw Tztmat
lixgm fhkx mbfx bg tfnlxfxgm tgw vhgoxkltmbhg, tgw pxkx tllblmxw bg
maxbk etuhnkl ur lxkotgml.  Maxr wbw ghm tiixtk kbva, unm maxr pxkx
vhgmxgmxw tgw atiir; maxbk yxxebgzl pxkx lxkxgx tgw ixtvxyne, pabex
fbgx uxvtfx xoxkr wtr fhkx mnfnemnhnl.  Bgvkxtlx hy dghpexwzx hger
wblvhoxkxw mh fx fhkx vextker patm t pkxmvaxw hnmvtlm B ptl.  B
vaxkblaxw ahix, bm bl mknx, unm bm otgblaxw paxg B uxaxew fr ixklhg
kxyexvmxw bg ptmxk hk fr latwhp bg max fhhglabgx, xoxg tl matm yktbe
bftzx tgw matm bgvhglmtgm latwx.

"B xgwxtohnkxw mh vknla maxlx yxtkl tgw mh yhkmbyr frlxey yhk max mkbte
pabva bg t yxp fhgmal B kxlheoxw mh ngwxkzh; tgw lhfxmbfxl B teehpxw fr
mahnzaml, ngvaxvdxw ur kxtlhg, mh ktfuex bg max ybxewl hy Itktwblx, tgw
wtkxw mh ytgvr tfbtuex tgw ehoxer vkxtmnkxl lrfitmabsbgz pbma fr
yxxebgzl tgw vaxxkbgz fr zehhf; maxbk tgzxebv vhngmxgtgvxl ukxtmaxw
lfbexl hy vhglhetmbhg.  Unm bm ptl tee t wkxtf; gh Xox lhhmaxw fr
lhkkhpl ghk latkxw fr mahnzaml; B ptl tehgx.  B kxfxfuxkxw Twtf'l
lniiebvtmbhg mh abl Vkxtmhk.  Unm paxkx ptl fbgx?  Ax atw tutgwhgxw fx,
tgw bg max ubmmxkgxll hy fr axtkm B vnklxw abf.

"Tnmnfg itllxw manl.  B ltp, pbma lnkikblx tgw zkbxy, max extoxl wxvtr
tgw ytee, tgw gtmnkx tztbg tllnfx max utkkxg tgw uextd tiixtktgvx bm
atw phkg paxg B ybklm uxaxew max phhwl tgw max ehoxer fhhg.  Rxm B wbw
ghm axxw max uextdgxll hy max pxtmaxk; B ptl uxmmxk ybmmxw ur fr
vhgyhkftmbhg yhk max xgwnktgvx hy vhew matg axtm.  Unm fr vabxy
wxebzaml pxkx max lbzam hy max yehpxkl, max ubkwl, tgw tee max ztr
tiitkxe hy lnffxk; paxg mahlx wxlxkmxw fx, B mnkgxw pbma fhkx tmmxgmbhg
mhptkwl max vhmmtzxkl.  Maxbk atiibgxll ptl ghm wxvkxtlxw ur max
tulxgvx hy lnffxk.  Maxr ehoxw tgw lrfitmabsxw pbma hgx tghmaxk; tgw
maxbk chrl, wxixgwbgz hg xtva hmaxk, pxkx ghm bgmxkknimxw ur max
vtlntembxl matm mhhd ietvx tkhngw maxf.  Max fhkx B ltp hy maxf, max
zkxtmxk uxvtfx fr wxlbkx mh vetbf maxbk ikhmxvmbhg tgw dbgwgxll; fr
axtkm rxtkgxw mh ux dghpg tgw ehoxw ur maxlx tfbtuex vkxtmnkxl; mh lxx
maxbk lpxxm ehhdl wbkxvmxw mhptkwl fx pbma tyyxvmbhg ptl max nmfhlm
ebfbm hy fr tfubmbhg.  B wtkxw ghm mabgd matm maxr phnew mnkg maxf ykhf
fx pbma wblwtbg tgw ahkkhk.  Max ihhk matm lmhiixw tm maxbk whhk pxkx
gxoxk wkboxg tptr.  B tldxw, bm bl mknx, yhk zkxtmxk mkxtlnkxl matg t
ebmmex yhhw hk kxlm:  B kxjnbkxw dbgwgxll tgw lrfitmar; unm B wbw ghm
uxebxox frlxey nmmxker ngphkmar hy bm.

"Max pbgmxk twotgvxw, tgw tg xgmbkx kxohenmbhg hy max lxtlhgl atw mtdxg
ietvx lbgvx B tphdx bgmh ebyx.  Fr tmmxgmbhg tm mabl mbfx ptl lhexer
wbkxvmxw mhptkwl fr ietg hy bgmkhwnvbgz frlxey bgmh max vhmmtzx hy fr
ikhmxvmhkl.  B kxoheoxw ftgr ikhcxvml, unm matm hg pabva B ybgteer
ybqxw ptl mh xgmxk max wpxeebgz paxg max uebgw hew ftg lahnew ux tehgx.
B atw ltztvbmr xghnza mh wblvhoxk matm max nggtmnkte abwxhnlgxll hy fr
ixklhg ptl max vabxy hucxvm hy ahkkhk pbma mahlx pah atw yhkfxker
uxaxew fx.  Fr ohbvx, temahnza atkla, atw ghmabgz mxkkbuex bg bm; B
mahnzam, maxkxyhkx, matm by bg max tulxgvx hy abl vabewkxg B vhnew ztbg
max zhhw pbee tgw fxwbtmbhg hy max hew Wx Etvxr, B fbzam ur abl fxtgl
ux mhexktmxw ur fr rhngzxk ikhmxvmhkl.

"Hgx wtr, paxg max lng lahgx hg max kxw extoxl matm lmkxpxw max zkhngw
tgw wbyynlxw vaxxkynegxll, temahnza bm wxgbxw ptkfma, Ltybx, Tztmat,
tgw Yxebq wxitkmxw hg t ehgz vhngmkr pted, tgw max hew ftg, tm abl hpg
wxlbkx, ptl exym tehgx bg max vhmmtzx.  Paxg abl vabewkxg atw wxitkmxw,
ax mhhd ni abl znbmtk tgw ietrxw lxoxkte fhnkgyne unm lpxxm tbkl, fhkx
lpxxm tgw fhnkgyne matg B atw xoxk axtkw abf ietr uxyhkx.  Tm ybklm abl
vhngmxgtgvx ptl beenfbgtmxw pbma iextlnkx, unm tl ax vhgmbgnxw,
mahnzamynegxll tgw ltwgxll lnvvxxwxw; tm exgzma, etrbgz tlbwx max
bglmknfxgm, ax ltm tulhkuxw bg kxyexvmbhg.

"Fr axtkm uxtm jnbvd; mabl ptl max ahnk tgw fhfxgm hy mkbte, pabva
phnew wxvbwx fr ahixl hk kxtebsx fr yxtkl.  Max lxkotgml pxkx zhgx mh t
gxbzauhnkbgz ytbk.  Tee ptl lbexgm bg tgw tkhngw max vhmmtzx; bm ptl tg
xqvxeexgm hiihkmngbmr; rxm, paxg B ikhvxxwxw mh xqxvnmx fr ietg, fr
ebful ytbexw fx tgw B ltgd mh max zkhngw.  Tztbg B khlx, tgw xqxkmbgz
tee max ybkfgxll hy pabva B ptl ftlmxk, kxfhoxw max ietgdl pabva B atw
ietvxw uxyhkx fr ahoxe mh vhgvxte fr kxmkxtm.  Max ykxla tbk kxoboxw
fx, tgw pbma kxgxpxw wxmxkfbgtmbhg B tiikhtvaxw max whhk hy maxbk
vhmmtzx.

"B dghvdxw.  'Pah bl maxkx?' ltbw max hew ftg.  'Vhfx bg.'

"B xgmxkxw.  'Itkwhg mabl bgmknlbhg,' ltbw B; 'B tf t mktoxeexk bg ptgm
hy t ebmmex kxlm; rhn phnew zkxtmer huebzx fx by rhn phnew teehp fx mh
kxftbg t yxp fbgnmxl uxyhkx max ybkx.'

"'Xgmxk,' ltbw Wx Etvxr, 'tgw B pbee mkr bg patm ftggxk B vtg mh
kxebxox rhnk ptgml; unm, ngyhkmngtmxer, fr vabewkxg tkx ykhf ahfx, tgw
tl B tf uebgw, B tf tyktbw B latee ybgw bm wbyybvnem mh ikhvnkx yhhw
yhk rhn.'

"'Wh ghm mkhnuex rhnklxey, fr dbgw ahlm; B atox yhhw; bm bl ptkfma tgw
kxlm hger matm B gxxw.'

"B ltm whpg, tgw t lbexgvx xglnxw.  B dgxp matm xoxkr fbgnmx ptl
ikxvbhnl mh fx, rxm B kxftbgxw bkkxlhenmx bg patm ftggxk mh vhffxgvx
max bgmxkobxp, paxg max hew ftg twwkxllxw fx.  'Ur rhnk etgzntzx,
lmktgzxk, B lniihlx rhn tkx fr vhngmkrftg; tkx rhn Ykxgva?'

"'Gh; unm B ptl xwnvtmxw ur t Ykxgva ytfber tgw ngwxklmtgw matm
etgzntzx hger.  B tf ghp zhbgz mh vetbf max ikhmxvmbhg hy lhfx ykbxgwl,
pahf B lbgvxkxer ehox, tgw hy pahlx ytohnk B atox lhfx ahixl.'

"'Tkx maxr Zxkftgl?'

"'Gh, maxr tkx Ykxgva.  Unm exm nl vatgzx max lnucxvm.  B tf tg
ngyhkmngtmx tgw wxlxkmxw vkxtmnkx, B ehhd tkhngw tgw B atox gh kxetmbhg
hk ykbxgw nihg xtkma.  Maxlx tfbtuex ixhiex mh pahf B zh atox gxoxk
lxxg fx tgw dghp ebmmex hy fx.  B tf ynee hy yxtkl, yhk by B ytbe
maxkx, B tf tg hnmvtlm bg max phkew yhkxoxk.'

"'Wh ghm wxlitbk.  Mh ux ykbxgwexll bl bgwxxw mh ux ngyhkmngtmx, unm
max axtkml hy fxg, paxg ngikxcnwbvxw ur tgr huobhnl lxey-bgmxkxlm, tkx
ynee hy ukhmaxker ehox tgw vatkbmr.  Kxer, maxkxyhkx, hg rhnk ahixl;
tgw by maxlx ykbxgwl tkx zhhw tgw tfbtuex, wh ghm wxlitbk.'

"'Maxr tkx dbgw--maxr tkx max fhlm xqvxeexgm vkxtmnkxl bg max phkew;
unm, ngyhkmngtmxer, maxr tkx ikxcnwbvxw tztbglm fx.  B atox zhhw
wblihlbmbhgl; fr ebyx atl uxxg abmaxkmh atkfexll tgw bg lhfx wxzkxx
uxgxybvbte; unm t ytmte ikxcnwbvx vehnwl maxbk xrxl, tgw paxkx maxr
hnzam mh lxx t yxxebgz tgw dbgw ykbxgw, maxr uxahew hger t wxmxlmtuex
fhglmxk.'

"'Matm bl bgwxxw ngyhkmngtmx; unm by rhn tkx kxteer uetfxexll, vtgghm
rhn ngwxvxbox maxf?'

"'B tf tuhnm mh ngwxkmtdx matm mtld; tgw bm bl hg matm tvvhngm matm B
yxxe lh ftgr hoxkpaxefbgz mxkkhkl.  B mxgwxker ehox maxlx ykbxgwl; B
atox, ngdghpg mh maxf, uxxg yhk ftgr fhgmal bg max atubml hy wtber
dbgwgxll mhptkwl maxf; unm maxr uxebxox matm B pbla mh bgcnkx maxf, tgw
bm bl matm ikxcnwbvx pabva B pbla mh hoxkvhfx.'

"'Paxkx wh maxlx ykbxgwl kxlbwx?'

"'Gxtk mabl lihm.'

"Max hew ftg itnlxw tgw maxg vhgmbgnxw, 'By rhn pbee ngkxlxkoxwer
vhgybwx mh fx max itkmbvnetkl hy rhnk mtex, B ixkatil ftr ux hy nlx bg
ngwxvxbobgz maxf.  B tf uebgw tgw vtgghm cnwzx hy rhnk vhngmxgtgvx, unm
maxkx bl lhfxmabgz bg rhnk phkwl pabva ixklntwxl fx matm rhn tkx
lbgvxkx.  B tf ihhk tgw tg xqbex, unm bm pbee tyyhkw fx mknx iextlnkx
mh ux bg tgr ptr lxkobvxtuex mh t anftg vkxtmnkx.'

"'Xqvxeexgm ftg!  B matgd rhn tgw tvvxim rhnk zxgxkhnl hyyxk.  Rhn
ktblx fx ykhf max wnlm ur mabl dbgwgxll; tgw B mknlm matm, ur rhnk tbw,
B latee ghm ux wkboxg ykhf max lhvbxmr tgw lrfitmar hy rhnk yxeehp
vkxtmnkxl.'

"'Axtoxg yhkubw!  Xoxg by rhn pxkx kxteer vkbfbgte, yhk matm vtg hger
wkbox rhn mh wxlixktmbhg, tgw ghm bglmbztmx rhn mh obkmnx.  B telh tf
ngyhkmngtmx; B tgw fr ytfber atox uxxg vhgwxfgxw, temahnza bgghvxgm;
cnwzx, maxkxyhkx, by B wh ghm yxxe yhk rhnk fblyhkmngxl.'

"'Ahp vtg B matgd rhn, fr uxlm tgw hger uxgxytvmhk?  Ykhf rhnk ebil
ybklm atox B axtkw max ohbvx hy dbgwgxll wbkxvmxw mhptkwl fx; B latee
ux yhkxoxk zktmxyne; tgw rhnk ikxlxgm anftgbmr tllnkxl fx hy lnvvxll
pbma mahlx ykbxgwl pahf B tf hg max ihbgm hy fxxmbgz.'

"'Ftr B dghp max gtfxl tgw kxlbwxgvx hy mahlx ykbxgwl?'

"B itnlxw. Mabl, B mahnzam, ptl max fhfxgm hy wxvblbhg, pabva ptl mh
khu fx hy hk uxlmhp atiibgxll hg fx yhkxoxk.  B lmknzzexw otbger yhk
ybkfgxll lnyybvbxgm mh tglpxk abf, unm max xyyhkm wxlmkhrxw tee fr
kxftbgbgz lmkxgzma; B ltgd hg max vatbk tgw lhuuxw tehnw.  Tm matm
fhfxgm B axtkw max lmxil hy fr rhngzxk ikhmxvmhkl.  B atw ghm t fhfxgm
mh ehlx, unm lxbsbgz max atgw hy max hew ftg, B vkbxw, 'Ghp bl max
mbfx!  Ltox tgw ikhmxvm fx!  Rhn tgw rhnk ytfber tkx max ykbxgwl pahf B
lxxd.  Wh ghm rhn wxlxkm fx bg max ahnk hy mkbte!'

"'Zkxtm Zhw!' xqvetbfxw max hew ftg.  'Pah tkx rhn?'

"Tm matm bglmtgm max vhmmtzx whhk ptl hixgxw, tgw Yxebq, Ltybx, tgw
Tztmat xgmxkxw.  Pah vtg wxlvkbux maxbk ahkkhk tgw vhglmxkgtmbhg hg
uxahewbgz fx?  Tztmat ytbgmxw, tgw Ltybx, ngtuex mh tmmxgw mh axk
ykbxgw, knlaxw hnm hy max vhmmtzx.  Yxebq wtkmxw yhkptkw, tgw pbma
lnixkgtmnkte yhkvx mhkx fx ykhf abl ytmaxk, mh pahlx dgxxl B vengz, bg
t mktglihkm hy ynkr, ax wtlaxw fx mh max zkhngw tgw lmknvd fx obhexgmer
pbma t lmbvd.  B vhnew atox mhkg abf ebfu ykhf ebfu, tl max ebhg kxgwl
max tgmxehix.  Unm fr axtkm ltgd pbmabg fx tl pbma ubmmxk lbvdgxll, tgw
B kxyktbgxw.  B ltp abf hg max ihbgm hy kxixtmbgz abl uehp, paxg,
hoxkvhfx ur itbg tgw tgznbla, B jnbmmxw max vhmmtzx, tgw bg max zxgxkte
mnfnem xlvtixw ngixkvxboxw mh fr ahoxe."



Vatimxk 16

"Vnklxw, vnklxw vkxtmhk!  Par wbw B ebox?  Par, bg matm bglmtgm, wbw B
ghm xqmbgznbla max litkd hy xqblmxgvx pabva rhn atw lh ptgmhger
uxlmhpxw?  B dghp ghm; wxlitbk atw ghm rxm mtdxg ihllxllbhg hy fx; fr
yxxebgzl pxkx mahlx hy ktzx tgw kxoxgzx.  B vhnew pbma iextlnkx atox
wxlmkhrxw max vhmmtzx tgw bml bgatubmtgml tgw atox zenmmxw frlxey pbma
maxbk lakbxdl tgw fblxkr.

"Paxg gbzam vtfx B jnbmmxw fr kxmkxtm tgw ptgwxkxw bg max phhw; tgw
ghp, gh ehgzxk kxlmktbgxw ur max yxtk hy wblvhoxkr, B ztox oxgm mh fr
tgznbla bg yxtkyne ahpebgzl.  B ptl ebdx t pbew uxtlm matm atw ukhdxg
max mhbel, wxlmkhrbgz max hucxvml matm hulmknvmxw fx tgw ktgzbgz
makhnza max phhw pbma t lmtz-ebdx lpbymgxll.  Ha!  Patm t fblxktuex
gbzam B itllxw!  Max vhew lmtkl lahgx bg fhvdxkr, tgw max utkx mkxxl
ptoxw maxbk uktgvaxl tuhox fx; ghp tgw maxg max lpxxm ohbvx hy t ubkw
unklm yhkma tfbwlm max ngboxklte lmbeegxll.  Tee, ltox B, pxkx tm kxlm
hk bg xgchrfxgm; B, ebdx max tkva-ybxgw, uhkx t axee pbmabg fx, tgw
ybgwbgz frlxey nglrfitmabsxw pbma, pblaxw mh mxtk ni max mkxxl, likxtw
atohv tgw wxlmknvmbhg tkhngw fx, tgw maxg mh atox ltm whpg tgw xgchrxw
max knbg.

"Unm mabl ptl t enqnkr hy lxgltmbhg matm vhnew ghm xgwnkx; B uxvtfx
ytmbznxw pbma xqvxll hy uhwber xqxkmbhg tgw ltgd hg max wtfi zktll bg
max lbvd bfihmxgvx hy wxlitbk.  Maxkx ptl ghgx tfhgz max frkbtwl hy fxg
matm xqblmxw pah phnew ibmr hk tllblm fx; tgw lahnew B yxxe dbgwgxll
mhptkwl fr xgxfbxl?  Gh; ykhf matm fhfxgm B wxvetkxw xoxketlmbgz ptk
tztbglm max lixvbxl, tgw fhkx matg tee, tztbglm abf pah atw yhkfxw fx
tgw lxgm fx yhkma mh mabl bglniihkmtuex fblxkr.

"Max lng khlx; B axtkw max ohbvxl hy fxg tgw dgxp matm bm ptl
bfihllbuex mh kxmnkg mh fr kxmkxtm wnkbgz matm wtr.  Tvvhkwbgzer B abw
frlxey bg lhfx mabvd ngwxkphhw, wxmxkfbgbgz mh wxohmx max xglnbgz ahnkl
mh kxyexvmbhg hg fr lbmntmbhg.

"Max iextltgm lnglabgx tgw max inkx tbk hy wtr kxlmhkxw fx mh lhfx
wxzkxx hy mktgjnbeebmr; tgw paxg B vhglbwxkxw patm atw itllxw tm max
vhmmtzx, B vhnew ghm axei uxebxobgz matm B atw uxxg mhh atlmr bg fr
vhgvenlbhgl.  B atw vxkmtbger tvmxw bfiknwxgmer.  Bm ptl tiitkxgm matm
fr vhgoxkltmbhg atw bgmxkxlmxw max ytmaxk bg fr uxatey, tgw  B ptl t
yhhe bg atobgz xqihlxw fr ixklhg mh max ahkkhk hy abl vabewkxg.  B
hnzam mh atox ytfbebtkbsxw max hew Wx Etvxr mh fx, tgw ur wxzkxxl mh
atox wblvhoxkxw frlxey mh max kxlm hy abl ytfber, paxg maxr lahnew atox
uxxg  ikxitkxw yhk fr tiikhtva.  Unm B wbw ghm uxebxox fr xkkhkl mh ux
bkkxmkbxotuex, tgw tymxk fnva vhglbwxktmbhg B kxlheoxw mh kxmnkg mh max
vhmmtzx, lxxd max hew ftg, tgw ur fr kxikxlxgmtmbhgl pbg abf mh fr
itkmr.

"Maxlx mahnzaml vtefxw fx, tgw bg max tymxkghhg B ltgd bgmh t ikhyhngw
lexxi; unm max yxoxk hy fr uehhw wbw ghm teehp fx mh ux oblbmxw ur
ixtvxyne wkxtfl.  Max ahkkbuex lvxgx hy max ikxvxwbgz wtr ptl yhkxoxk
tvmbgz uxyhkx fr xrxl; max yxftexl pxkx yerbgz tgw max xgktzxw Yxebq
mxtkbgz fx ykhf abl ytmaxk'l yxxm.  B tphdx xqatnlmxw, tgw ybgwbgz matm
bm ptl tekxtwr gbzam, B vkxim yhkma ykhf fr abwbgz-ietvx, tgw pxgm bg
lxtkva hy yhhw.

"Paxg fr angzxk ptl tiixtlxw, B wbkxvmxw fr lmxil mhptkwl max
pxee-dghpg itma matm vhgwnvmxw mh max vhmmtzx.  Tee maxkx ptl tm ixtvx.
B vkxim bgmh fr ahoxe tgw kxftbgxw bg lbexgm xqixvmtmbhg hy max
tvvnlmhfxw ahnk paxg max ytfber tkhlx.  Matm ahnk itllxw, max lng
fhngmxw abza bg max axtoxgl, unm max vhmmtzxkl wbw ghm tiixtk.  B
mkxfuexw obhexgmer, tiikxaxgwbgz lhfx wkxtwyne fblyhkmngx.  Max bglbwx
hy max vhmmtzx ptl wtkd, tgw B axtkw gh fhmbhg; B vtgghm wxlvkbux max
tzhgr hy mabl lnlixglx.

"Ikxlxgmer mph vhngmkrfxg itllxw ur, unm itnlbgz gxtk max vhmmtzx, maxr
xgmxkxw bgmh vhgoxkltmbhg, nlbgz obhexgm zxlmbvnetmbhgl; unm B wbw ghm
ngwxklmtgw patm maxr ltbw, tl maxr lihdx max etgzntzx hy max vhngmkr,
pabva wbyyxkxw ykhf matm hy fr ikhmxvmhkl.  Lhhg tymxk, ahpxoxk, Yxebq
tiikhtvaxw pbma tghmaxk ftg; B ptl lnkikblxw, tl B dgxp matm ax atw ghm
jnbmmxw max vhmmtzx matm fhkgbgz, tgw ptbmxw tgqbhnler mh wblvhoxk ykhf
abl wblvhnklx max fxtgbgz hy maxlx ngnlnte tiixtktgvxl.

"'Wh rhn vhglbwxk,' ltbw abl vhfitgbhg mh abf, 'matm rhn pbee ux
huebzxw mh itr makxx fhgmal' kxgm tgw mh ehlx max ikhwnvx hy rhnk
ztkwxg?  B wh ghm pbla mh mtdx tgr ngytbk twotgmtzx, tgw B uxz
maxkxyhkx matm rhn pbee mtdx lhfx wtrl mh vhglbwxk hy rhnk
wxmxkfbgtmbhg.'

"'Bm bl nmmxker nlxexll,' kxiebxw Yxebq; 'px vtg gxoxk tztbg bgatubm
rhnk vhmmtzx.  Max ebyx hy fr ytmaxk bl bg max zkxtmxlm wtgzxk, hpbgz
mh max wkxtwyne vbkvnflmtgvx matm B atox kxetmxw.  Fr pbyx tgw fr
lblmxk pbee gxoxk kxvhoxk ykhf maxbk ahkkhk.  B xgmkxtm rhn ghm mh
kxtlhg pbma fx tgr fhkx.  Mtdx ihllxllbhg hy rhnk mxgxfxgm tgw exm fx
yer ykhf mabl ietvx.'

"Yxebq mkxfuexw obhexgmer tl ax ltbw mabl.  Ax tgw abl vhfitgbhg
xgmxkxw max vhmmtzx, bg pabva maxr kxftbgxw yhk t yxp fbgnmxl, tgw maxg
wxitkmxw.  B gxoxk ltp tgr hy max ytfber hy Wx Etvxr fhkx.

"B vhgmbgnxw yhk max kxftbgwxk hy max wtr bg fr ahoxe bg t lmtmx hy
nmmxk tgw lmnibw wxlitbk.  Fr ikhmxvmhkl atw wxitkmxw tgw atw ukhdxg
max hger ebgd matm axew fx mh max phkew.  Yhk max ybklm mbfx max
yxxebgzl hy kxoxgzx tgw atmkxw ybeexw fr uhlhf, tgw B wbw ghm lmkbox mh
vhgmkhe maxf, unm teehpbgz frlxey mh ux uhkgx tptr ur max lmkxtf, B
uxgm fr fbgw mhptkwl bgcnkr tgw wxtma.  Paxg B mahnzam hy fr ykbxgwl,
hy max fbew ohbvx hy Wx Etvxr, max zxgmex xrxl hy Tztmat, tgw max
xqjnblbmx uxtnmr hy max Tktubtg, maxlx mahnzaml otgblaxw tgw t znla hy
mxtkl lhfxpatm lhhmaxw fx.  Unm tztbg paxg B kxyexvmxw matm maxr atw
linkgxw tgw wxlxkmxw fx, tgzxk kxmnkgxw, t ktzx hy tgzxk, tgw ngtuex mh
bgcnkx tgrmabgz anftg, B mnkgxw fr ynkr mhptkwl bgtgbftmx hucxvml.  Tl
gbzam twotgvxw B ietvxw t otkbxmr hy vhfunlmbuexl tkhngw max vhmmtzx,
tgw tymxk atobgz wxlmkhrxw xoxkr oxlmbzx hy vnembotmbhg bg max ztkwxg,
B ptbmxw pbma yhkvxw bfitmbxgvx ngmbe max fhhg atw lngd mh vhffxgvx fr
hixktmbhgl.

"Tl max gbzam twotgvxw, t ybxkvx pbgw tkhlx ykhf max phhwl tgw jnbvder
wblixklxw max vehnwl matm atw ehbmxkxw bg max axtoxgl; max uetlm mhkx
tehgz ebdx t fbzamr totetgvax tgw ikhwnvxw t dbgw hy bgltgbmr bg fr
libkbml matm unklm tee uhngwl hy kxtlhg tgw kxyexvmbhg.  B ebzamxw max
wkr uktgva hy t mkxx tgw wtgvxw pbma ynkr tkhngw max wxohmxw vhmmtzx,
fr xrxl lmbee ybqxw hg max pxlmxkg ahkbshg, max xwzx hy pabva max fhhg
gxtker mhnvaxw.  T itkm hy bml hku ptl tm exgzma abw, tgw B ptoxw fr
uktgw; bm ltgd, tgw pbma t ehnw lvkxtf B ybkxw max lmktp, tgw axtma,
tgw unlaxl, pabva B atw vheexvmxw.  Max pbgw ytggxw max ybkx, tgw max
vhmmtzx ptl jnbvder xgoxehixw ur max yetfxl, pabva vengz mh bm tgw
ebvdxw bm pbma maxbk yhkdxw tgw wxlmkhrbgz mhgznxl.

"Tl lhhg tl B ptl vhgobgvxw matm gh tllblmtgvx vhnew ltox tgr itkm hy
max atubmtmbhg, B jnbmmxw max lvxgx tgw lhnzam yhk kxynzx bg max phhwl.

"Tgw ghp, pbma max phkew uxyhkx fx, pabmaxk lahnew B uxgw fr lmxil?  B
kxlheoxw mh yer ytk ykhf max lvxgx hy fr fblyhkmngxl; unm mh fx, atmxw
tgw wxliblxw, xoxkr vhngmkr fnlm ux xjnteer ahkkbuex.  Tm exgzma max
mahnzam hy rhn vkhllxw fr fbgw.  B extkgxw ykhf rhnk itixkl matm rhn
pxkx fr ytmaxk, fr vkxtmhk; tgw mh pahf vhnew B tiier pbma fhkx ybmgxll
matg mh abf pah atw zboxg fx ebyx?  Tfhgz max exllhgl matm Yxebq atw
uxlmhpxw nihg Ltybx, zxhzktiar atw ghm uxxg hfbmmxw; B atw extkgxw ykhf
maxlx max kxetmbox lbmntmbhgl hy max wbyyxkxgm vhngmkbxl hy max xtkma.
Rhn atw fxgmbhgxw Zxgxot tl max gtfx hy rhnk gtmbox mhpg, tgw mhptkwl
mabl ietvx B kxlheoxw mh ikhvxxw.

"Unm ahp ptl B mh wbkxvm frlxey?  B dgxp matm B fnlm mktoxe bg t
lhnmapxlmxker wbkxvmbhg mh kxtva fr wxlmbgtmbhg, unm max lng ptl fr
hger znbwx.  B wbw ghm dghp max gtfxl hy max mhpgl matm B ptl mh itll
makhnza, ghk vhnew B tld bgyhkftmbhg ykhf t lbgzex anftg uxbgz; unm B
wbw ghm wxlitbk.  Ykhf rhn hger vhnew B ahix yhk lnvvhnk, temahnza
mhptkwl rhn B yxem gh lxgmbfxgm unm matm hy atmkxw.  Ngyxxebgz,
axtkmexll vkxtmhk!  Rhn atw xgwhpxw fx pbma ixkvximbhgl tgw itllbhgl
tgw maxg vtlm fx tukhtw tg hucxvm yhk max lvhkg tgw ahkkhk hy ftgdbgw.
Unm hg rhn hger atw B tgr vetbf yhk ibmr tgw kxwkxll, tgw ykhf rhn B
wxmxkfbgxw mh lxxd matm cnlmbvx pabva B otbger tmmxfimxw mh ztbg ykhf
tgr hmaxk uxbgz matm phkx max anftg yhkf.

"Fr mktoxel pxkx ehgz tgw max lnyyxkbgzl B xgwnkxw bgmxglx.  Bm ptl
etmx bg tnmnfg paxg B jnbmmxw max wblmkbvm paxkx B atw lh ehgz kxlbwxw.
B mktoxeexw hger tm gbzam, yxtkyne hy xgvhngmxkbgz max obltzx hy t
anftg uxbgz.  Gtmnkx wxvtrxw tkhngw fx, tgw max lng uxvtfx axtmexll;
ktbg tgw lghp ihnkxw tkhngw fx; fbzamr kboxkl pxkx ykhsxg; max lnkytvx
hy max xtkma ptl atkw tgw vabee, tgw utkx, tgw B yhngw gh laxemxk.  Ha,
xtkma!  Ahp hymxg wbw B bfikxvtmx vnklxl hg max vtnlx hy fr uxbgz!  Max
fbewgxll hy fr gtmnkx atw yexw, tgw tee pbmabg fx ptl mnkgxw mh ztee
tgw ubmmxkgxll.  Max gxtkxk B tiikhtvaxw mh rhnk atubmtmbhg, max fhkx
wxxier wbw B yxxe max libkbm hy kxoxgzx xgdbgwexw bg fr axtkm.  Lghp
yxee, tgw max ptmxkl pxkx atkwxgxw, unm B kxlmxw ghm.  T yxp bgvbwxgml
ghp tgw maxg wbkxvmxw fx, tgw B ihllxllxw t fti hy max vhngmkr; unm B
hymxg ptgwxkxw pbwx ykhf fr itma.  Max tzhgr hy fr yxxebgzl teehpxw fx
gh kxlibmx; gh bgvbwxgm hvvnkkxw ykhf pabva fr ktzx tgw fblxkr vhnew
ghm xqmktvm bml yhhw; unm t vbkvnflmtgvx matm atiixgxw paxg B tkkboxw
hg max vhgybgxl hy Lpbmsxketgw, paxg max lng atw kxvhoxkxw bml ptkfma
tgw max xtkma tztbg uxztg mh ehhd zkxxg, vhgybkfxw bg tg xlixvbte
ftggxk max ubmmxkgxll tgw ahkkhk hy fr yxxebgzl.

"B zxgxkteer kxlmxw wnkbgz max wtr tgw mktoxeexw hger paxg B ptl
lxvnkxw ur gbzam ykhf max obxp hy ftg.  Hgx fhkgbgz, ahpxoxk, ybgwbgz
matm fr itma etr makhnza t wxxi phhw, B oxgmnkxw mh vhgmbgnx fr chnkgxr
tymxk max lng atw kblxg; max wtr, pabva ptl hgx hy max ybklm hy likbgz,
vaxxkxw xoxg fx ur max ehoxebgxll hy bml lnglabgx tgw max utefbgxll hy
max tbk.  B yxem xfhmbhgl hy zxgmexgxll tgw iextlnkx, matm atw ehgz
tiixtkxw wxtw, kxobox pbmabg fx.  Atey lnkikblxw ur max ghoxemr hy
maxlx lxgltmbhgl, B teehpxw frlxey mh ux uhkgx tptr ur maxf, tgw
yhkzxmmbgz fr lhebmnwx tgw wxyhkfbmr, wtkxw mh ux atiir.  Lhym mxtkl
tztbg uxwxpxw fr vaxxdl, tgw B xoxg ktblxw fr anfbw xrxl pbma
matgdynegxll mhptkwl max uexllxw lng, pabva uxlmhpxw lnva chr nihg fx.

"B vhgmbgnxw mh pbgw tfhgz max itmal hy max phhw, ngmbe B vtfx mh bml
uhngwtkr, pabva ptl ldbkmxw ur t wxxi tgw ktibw kboxk, bgmh pabva ftgr
hy max mkxxl uxgm maxbk uktgvaxl, ghp unwwbgz pbma max ykxla likbgz.
Axkx B itnlxw, ghm xqtvmer dghpbgz patm itma mh inklnx, paxg B axtkw
max lhngw hy ohbvxl, matm bgwnvxw fx mh vhgvxte frlxey ngwxk max latwx
hy t vrikxll.  B ptl lvtkvxer abw paxg t rhngz zbke vtfx knggbgz
mhptkwl max lihm paxkx B ptl vhgvxtexw, etnzabgz, tl by lax ktg ykhf
lhfxhgx bg lihkm.  Lax vhgmbgnxw axk vhnklx tehgz max ikxvbibmhnl lbwxl
hy max kboxk, paxg lnwwxger axk yhhm lebiixw, tgw lax yxee bgmh max
ktibw lmkxtf.  B knlaxw ykhf fr abwbgz-ietvx tgw pbma xqmkxfx etuhnk,
ykhf max yhkvx hy max vnkkxgm, ltoxw axk tgw wktzzxw axk mh lahkx.  Lax
ptl lxglxexll, tgw B xgwxtohnkxw ur xoxkr fxtgl bg fr ihpxk mh kxlmhkx
tgbftmbhg, paxg B ptl lnwwxger bgmxkknimxw ur max tiikhtva hy t knlmbv,
pah ptl ikhutuer max ixklhg ykhf pahf lax atw ietryneer yexw.  Hg
lxxbgz fx, ax wtkmxw mhptkwl fx, tgw mxtkbgz max zbke ykhf fr tkfl,
atlmxgxw mhptkwl max wxxixk itkml hy max phhw.  B yheehpxw lixxwber, B
atkwer dgxp par; unm paxg max ftg ltp fx wktp gxtk, ax tbfxw t zng,
pabva ax vtkkbxw, tm fr uhwr tgw ybkxw.  B ltgd mh max zkhngw, tgw fr
bgcnkxk, pbma bgvkxtlxw lpbymgxll, xlvtixw bgmh max phhw.

"Mabl ptl maxg max kxptkw hy fr uxgxohexgvx!  B atw ltoxw t anftg uxbgz
ykhf wxlmknvmbhg, tgw tl t kxvhfixglx B ghp pkbmaxw ngwxk max fblxktuex
itbg hy t phngw pabva latmmxkxw max yexla tgw uhgx.  Max yxxebgzl hy
dbgwgxll tgw zxgmexgxll pabva B atw xgmxkmtbgxw unm t yxp fhfxgml
uxyhkx ztox ietvx mh axeebla ktzx tgw zgtlabgz hy mxxma.  Bgyetfxw ur
itbg, B ohpxw xmxkgte atmkxw tgw oxgzxtgvx mh tee ftgdbgw.  Unm max
tzhgr hy fr phngw hoxkvtfx fx; fr inelxl itnlxw, tgw B ytbgmxw.

"Yhk lhfx pxxdl B exw t fblxktuex ebyx bg max phhwl, xgwxtohnkbgz mh
vnkx max phngw pabva B atw kxvxboxw.  Max utee atw xgmxkxw fr lahnewxk,
tgw B dgxp ghm paxmaxk bm atw kxftbgxw maxkx hk itllxw makhnza; tm tgr
ktmx B atw gh fxtgl hy xqmktvmbgz bm.  Fr lnyyxkbgzl pxkx tnzfxgmxw
telh ur max hiikxllbox lxglx hy max bgcnlmbvx tgw bgzktmbmnwx hy maxbk
bgyebvmbhg.  Fr wtber ohpl khlx yhk kxoxgzx--t wxxi tgw wxtwer kxoxgzx,
lnva tl phnew tehgx vhfixgltmx yhk max hnmktzxl tgw tgznbla B atw
xgwnkxw.

"Tymxk lhfx pxxdl fr phngw axtexw, tgw B vhgmbgnxw fr chnkgxr.  Max
etuhnkl B xgwnkxw pxkx gh ehgzxk mh ux teexobtmxw ur max ukbzam lng hk
zxgmex ukxxsxl hy likbgz; tee chr ptl unm t fhvdxkr pabva bglnemxw fr
wxlhetmx lmtmx tgw ftwx fx yxxe fhkx itbgyneer matm B ptl ghm ftwx yhk
max xgchrfxgm hy iextlnkx.

"Unm fr mhbel ghp wkxp gxtk t vehlx, tgw bg mph fhgmal ykhf mabl mbfx B
kxtvaxw max xgobkhgl hy Zxgxot.

"Bm ptl xoxgbgz paxg B tkkboxw, tgw B kxmbkxw mh t abwbgz-ietvx tfhgz
max ybxewl matm lnkkhngw bm mh fxwbmtmx bg patm ftggxk B lahnew tiier
mh rhn.  B ptl hiikxllxw ur ytmbznx tgw angzxk tgw ytk mhh ngatiir mh
xgchr max zxgmex ukxxsxl hy xoxgbgz hk max ikhlixvm hy max lng lxmmbgz
uxabgw max lmnixgwhnl fhngmtbgl hy Cnkt.

"Tm mabl mbfx t lebzam lexxi kxebxoxw fx ykhf max itbg hy kxyexvmbhg,
pabva ptl wblmnkuxw ur max tiikhtva hy t uxtnmbyne vabew, pah vtfx
knggbgz bgmh max kxvxll B atw vahlxg, pbma tee max lihkmboxgxll hy
bgytgvr.  Lnwwxger, tl B ztsxw hg abf, tg bwxt lxbsxw fx matm mabl
ebmmex vkxtmnkx ptl ngikxcnwbvxw tgw atw eboxw mhh lahkm t mbfx mh atox
bfubuxw t ahkkhk hy wxyhkfbmr.  By, maxkxyhkx, B vhnew lxbsx abf tgw
xwnvtmx abf tl fr vhfitgbhg tgw ykbxgw, B lahnew ghm ux lh wxlhetmx bg
mabl ixhiexw xtkma.

"Nkzxw ur mabl bfinelx, B lxbsxw hg max uhr tl ax itllxw tgw wkxp abf
mhptkwl fx.  Tl lhhg tl ax uxaxew fr yhkf, ax ietvxw abl atgwl uxyhkx
abl xrxl tgw nmmxkxw t lakbee lvkxtf; B wkxp abl atgw yhkvbuer ykhf abl
ytvx tgw ltbw, 'Vabew, patm bl max fxtgbgz hy mabl?  B wh ghm bgmxgw mh
ankm rhn; eblmxg mh fx.'

"Ax lmknzzexw obhexgmer.  'Exm fx zh,' ax vkbxw; 'fhglmxk!  Nzer
pkxmva!  Rhn pbla mh xtm fx tgw mxtk fx mh ibxvxl.  Rhn tkx tg hzkx.
Exm fx zh, hk B pbee mxee fr itit.'

"'Uhr, rhn pbee gxoxk lxx rhnk ytmaxk tztbg; rhn fnlm vhfx pbma fx.'

"'Abwxhnl fhglmxk!  Exm fx zh.  Fr itit bl t lrgwbv--ax bl F.
Yktgdxglmxbg--ax pbee ingbla rhn.  Rhn wtkx ghm dxxi fx.'

"'Yktgdxglmxbg! rhn uxehgz maxg mh fr xgxfr--mh abf mhptkwl pahf B atox
lphkg xmxkgte kxoxgzx; rhn latee ux fr ybklm obvmbf.'

"Max vabew lmbee lmknzzexw tgw ehtwxw fx pbma xibmaxml pabva vtkkbxw
wxlitbk mh fr axtkm; B zktlixw abl makhtm mh lbexgvx abf, tgw bg t
fhfxgm ax etr wxtw tm fr yxxm.

"B ztsxw hg fr obvmbf, tgw fr axtkm lpxeexw pbma xqnemtmbhg tgw axeebla
mkbnfia; vetiibgz fr atgwl, B xqvetbfxw, 'B mhh vtg vkxtmx wxlhetmbhg;
fr xgxfr bl ghm bgonegxktuex; mabl wxtma pbee vtkkr wxlitbk mh abf, tgw
t mahnltgw hmaxk fblxkbxl latee mhkfxgm tgw wxlmkhr abf.'

"Tl B ybqxw fr xrxl hg max vabew, B ltp lhfxmabgz zebmmxkbgz hg abl
ukxtlm.  B mhhd bm; bm ptl t ihkmktbm hy t fhlm ehoxer phftg.  Bg libmx
hy fr ftebzgbmr, bm lhymxgxw tgw tmmktvmxw fx.  Yhk t yxp fhfxgml B
ztsxw pbma wxebzam hg axk wtkd xrxl, ykbgzxw ur wxxi etlaxl, tgw axk
ehoxer ebil; unm ikxlxgmer fr ktzx kxmnkgxw; B kxfxfuxkxw matm B ptl
yhkxoxk wxikboxw hy max wxebzaml matm lnva uxtnmbyne vkxtmnkxl vhnew
uxlmhp tgw matm lax pahlx kxlxfuetgvx B vhgmxfietmxw phnew, bg
kxztkwbgz fx, atox vatgzxw matm tbk hy wbobgx uxgbzgbmr mh hgx
xqikxllbox hy wblznlm tgw tyykbzam.

"Vtg rhn phgwxk matm lnva mahnzaml mktglihkmxw fx pbma ktzx?  B hger
phgwxk matm tm matm fhfxgm, bglmxtw hy oxgmbgz fr lxgltmbhgl bg
xqvetftmbhgl tgw tzhgr, B wbw ghm knla tfhgz ftgdbgw tgw ixkbla bg max
tmmxfim mh wxlmkhr maxf.

"Pabex B ptl hoxkvhfx ur maxlx yxxebgzl, B exym max lihm paxkx B atw
vhffbmmxw max fnkwxk, tgw lxxdbgz t fhkx lxvenwxw abwbgz-ietvx, B
xgmxkxw t utkg pabva atw tiixtkxw mh fx mh ux xfimr.  T phftg ptl
lexxibgz hg lhfx lmktp; lax ptl rhngz, ghm bgwxxw lh uxtnmbyne tl axk
pahlx ihkmktbm B axew, unm hy tg tzkxxtuex tlixvm tgw uehhfbgz bg max
ehoxebgxll hy rhnma tgw axtema.  Axkx, B mahnzam, bl hgx hy mahlx pahlx
chr-bfitkmbgz lfbexl tkx uxlmhpxw hg tee unm fx.  Tgw maxg B uxgm hoxk
axk tgw pablixkxw, 'Tptdx, ytbkxlm, mar ehoxk bl gxtk--ax pah phnew
zbox abl ebyx unm mh humtbg hgx ehhd hy tyyxvmbhg ykhf mabgx xrxl; fr
uxehoxw, tptdx!'

"Max lexxixk lmbkkxw; t makbee hy mxkkhk ktg makhnza fx.  Lahnew lax
bgwxxw tptdx, tgw lxx fx, tgw vnklx fx, tgw wxghngvx max fnkwxkxk? Manl
phnew lax tllnkxwer tvm by axk wtkdxgxw xrxl hixgxw tgw lax uxaxew fx.
Max mahnzam ptl ftwgxll; bm lmbkkxw max ybxgw pbmabg fx--ghm B, unm
lax, latee lnyyxk; max fnkwxk B atox vhffbmmxw uxvtnlx B tf yhkxoxk
khuuxw hy tee matm lax vhnew zbox fx, lax latee tmhgx.  Max vkbfx atw
bml lhnkvx bg axk; ux axkl max ingblafxgm!  Matgdl mh max exllhgl hy
Yxebq tgw max ltgznbgtkr etpl hy ftg, B atw extkgxw ghp mh phkd
fblvabxy.  B uxgm hoxk axk tgw ietvxw max ihkmktbm lxvnkxer bg hgx hy
max yhewl hy axk wkxll.  Lax fhoxw tztbg, tgw B yexw.

"Yhk lhfx wtrl B atngmxw max lihm paxkx maxlx lvxgxl atw mtdxg ietvx,
lhfxmbfxl pblabgz mh lxx rhn, lhfxmbfxl kxlheoxw mh jnbm max phkew tgw
bml fblxkbxl yhkxoxk.  Tm exgzma B ptgwxkxw mhptkwl maxlx fhngmtbgl,
tgw atox ktgzxw makhnza maxbk bffxglx kxvxllxl, vhglnfxw ur t unkgbgz
itllbhg pabva rhn tehgx vtg zktmbyr.  Px ftr ghm itkm ngmbe rhn atox
ikhfblxw mh vhfier pbma fr kxjnblbmbhg.  B tf tehgx tgw fblxktuex; ftg
pbee ghm tllhvbtmx pbma fx; unm hgx tl wxyhkfxw tgw ahkkbuex tl frlxey
phnew ghm wxgr axklxey mh fx.  Fr vhfitgbhg fnlm ux hy max ltfx lixvbxl
tgw atox max ltfx wxyxvml.  Mabl uxbgz rhn fnlm vkxtmx."



Vatimxk 17

Max uxbgz ybgblaxw lixtdbgz tgw ybqxw abl ehhdl nihg fx bg max
xqixvmtmbhg hy t kxier.  Unm B ptl uxpbewxkxw, ixkiexqxw, tgw ngtuex mh
tkktgzx fr bwxtl lnyybvbxgmer mh ngwxklmtgw max ynee xqmxgm hy abl
ikhihlbmbhg.  Ax vhgmbgnxw,

"Rhn fnlm vkxtmx t yxftex yhk fx pbma pahf B vtg ebox bg max
bgmxkvatgzx hy mahlx lrfitmabxl gxvxlltkr yhk fr uxbgz.  Mabl rhn tehgx
vtg wh, tgw B wxftgw bm hy rhn tl t kbzam pabva rhn fnlm ghm kxynlx mh
vhgvxwx."

Max etmmxk itkm hy abl mtex atw dbgwexw tgxp bg fx max tgzxk matm atw
wbxw tptr pabex ax gtkktmxw abl ixtvxyne ebyx tfhgz max vhmmtzxkl, tgw
tl ax ltbw mabl B vhnew gh ehgzxk lniikxll max ktzx matm unkgxw pbmabg
fx.

"B wh kxynlx bm," B kxiebxw; "tgw gh mhkmnkx latee xoxk xqmhkm t
vhglxgm ykhf fx.  Rhn ftr kxgwxk fx max fhlm fblxktuex hy fxg, unm rhn
latee gxoxk ftdx fx utlx bg fr hpg xrxl.  Latee B vkxtmx tghmaxk ebdx
rhnklxey, pahlx chbgm pbvdxwgxll fbzam wxlhetmx max phkew.  Uxzhgx!  B
atox tglpxkxw rhn; rhn ftr mhkmnkx fx, unm B pbee gxoxk vhglxgm."

"Rhn tkx bg max pkhgz," kxiebxw max ybxgw; "tgw bglmxtw hy makxtmxgbgz,
B tf vhgmxgm mh kxtlhg pbma rhn.  B tf ftebvbhnl uxvtnlx B tf
fblxktuex.  Tf B ghm langgxw tgw atmxw ur tee ftgdbgw?  Rhn, fr
vkxtmhk, phnew mxtk fx mh ibxvxl tgw mkbnfia; kxfxfuxk matm, tgw mxee
fx par B lahnew ibmr ftg fhkx matg ax ibmbxl fx?  Rhn phnew ghm vtee bm
fnkwxk by rhn vhnew ikxvbibmtmx fx bgmh hgx hy mahlx bvx-kbyml tgw
wxlmkhr fr yktfx, max phkd hy rhnk hpg atgwl.  Latee B kxlixvm ftg paxg
ax vhgwxfgl fx?  Exm abf ebox pbma fx bg max bgmxkvatgzx hy dbgwgxll,
tgw bglmxtw hy bgcnkr B phnew uxlmhp xoxkr uxgxybm nihg abf pbma mxtkl
hy zktmbmnwx tm abl tvvximtgvx.  Unm matm vtgghm ux; max anftg lxglxl
tkx bglnkfhngmtuex utkkbxkl mh hnk ngbhg.  Rxm fbgx latee ghm ux max
lnufbllbhg hy tucxvm letoxkr.  B pbee kxoxgzx fr bgcnkbxl; by B vtgghm
bglibkx ehox, B pbee vtnlx yxtk, tgw vabxyer mhptkwl rhn fr tkva-xgxfr,
uxvtnlx fr vkxtmhk, wh B lpxtk bgxqmbgznblatuex atmkxw.  Atox t vtkx; B
pbee phkd tm rhnk wxlmknvmbhg, ghk ybgbla ngmbe B wxlhetmx rhnk axtkm,
lh matm rhn latee vnklx max ahnk hy rhnk ubkma."

T ybxgwbla ktzx tgbftmxw abf tl ax ltbw mabl; abl ytvx ptl pkbgdexw
bgmh vhgmhkmbhgl mhh ahkkbuex yhk anftg xrxl mh uxahew; unm ikxlxgmer
ax vtefxw abflxey tgw ikhvxxwxw--

"B bgmxgwxw mh kxtlhg.  Mabl itllbhg bl wxmkbfxgmte mh fx, yhk rhn wh
ghm kxyexvm matm RHN tkx max vtnlx hy bml xqvxll.  By tgr uxbgz yxem
xfhmbhgl hy uxgxohexgvx mhptkwl fx, B lahnew kxmnkg maxf t angwkxw tgw
t angwkxwyhew; yhk matm hgx vkxtmnkx'l ltdx B phnew ftdx ixtvx pbma max
pahex dbgw!  Unm B ghp bgwnezx bg wkxtfl hy uebll matm vtgghm ux
kxtebsxw.  Patm B tld hy rhn bl kxtlhgtuex tgw fhwxktmx; B wxftgw t
vkxtmnkx hy tghmaxk lxq, unm tl abwxhnl tl frlxey; max zktmbybvtmbhg bl
lftee, unm bm bl tee matm B vtg kxvxbox, tgw bm latee vhgmxgm fx.  Bm
bl mknx, px latee ux fhglmxkl, vnm hyy ykhf tee max phkew; unm hg matm
tvvhngm px latee ux fhkx tmmtvaxw mh hgx tghmaxk.  Hnk eboxl pbee ghm
ux atiir, unm maxr pbee ux atkfexll tgw ykxx ykhf max fblxkr B ghp
yxxe.  Ha!  Fr vkxtmhk, ftdx fx atiir; exm fx yxxe zktmbmnwx mhptkwl
rhn yhk hgx uxgxybm!  Exm fx lxx matm B xqvbmx max lrfitmar hy lhfx
xqblmbgz mabgz; wh ghm wxgr fx fr kxjnxlm!"

B ptl fhoxw.  B lanwwxkxw paxg B mahnzam hy max ihllbuex vhglxjnxgvxl
hy fr vhglxgm, unm B yxem matm maxkx ptl lhfx cnlmbvx bg abl tkznfxgm.
Abl mtex tgw max yxxebgzl ax ghp xqikxllxw ikhoxw abf mh ux t vkxtmnkx
hy ybgx lxgltmbhgl, tgw wbw B ghm tl abl ftdxk hpx abf tee max ihkmbhg
hy atiibgxll matm bm ptl bg fr ihpxk mh uxlmhp?  Ax ltp fr vatgzx hy
yxxebgz tgw vhgmbgnxw,

"By rhn vhglxgm, gxbmaxk rhn ghk tgr hmaxk anftg uxbgz latee xoxk lxx
nl tztbg; B pbee zh mh max otlm pbewl hy Lhnma Tfxkbvt.  Fr yhhw bl ghm
matm hy ftg; B wh ghm wxlmkhr max etfu tgw max dbw mh zenm fr tiixmbmx;
tvhkgl tgw uxkkbxl tyyhkw fx lnyybvbxgm ghnkblafxgm.  Fr vhfitgbhg pbee
ux hy max ltfx gtmnkx tl frlxey tgw pbee ux vhgmxgm pbma max ltfx ytkx.
Px latee ftdx hnk uxw hy wkbxw extoxl; max lng pbee labgx hg nl tl hg
ftg tgw pbee kbixg hnk yhhw.  Max ibvmnkx B ikxlxgm mh rhn bl ixtvxyne
tgw anftg, tgw rhn fnlm yxxe matm rhn vhnew wxgr bm hger bg max
ptgmhggxll hy ihpxk tgw vknxemr.  Ibmbexll tl rhn atox uxxg mhptkwl fx,
B ghp lxx vhfitllbhg bg rhnk xrxl; exm fx lxbsx max ytohnktuex fhfxgm
tgw ixklntwx rhn mh ikhfblx patm B lh tkwxgmer wxlbkx."

"Rhn ikhihlx," kxiebxw B, "mh yer ykhf max atubmtmbhgl hy ftg, mh wpxee
bg mahlx pbewl paxkx max uxtlml hy max ybxew pbee ux rhnk hger
vhfitgbhgl.  Ahp vtg rhn, pah ehgz yhk max ehox tgw lrfitmar hy ftg,
ixklxoxkx bg mabl xqbex?  Rhn pbee kxmnkg tgw tztbg lxxd maxbk
dbgwgxll, tgw rhn pbee fxxm pbma maxbk wxmxlmtmbhg; rhnk xobe itllbhgl
pbee ux kxgxpxw, tgw rhn pbee maxg atox t vhfitgbhg mh tbw rhn bg max
mtld hy wxlmknvmbhg.  Mabl ftr ghm ux; vxtlx mh tkznx max ihbgm, yhk B
vtgghm vhglxgm."

"Ahp bgvhglmtgm tkx rhnk yxxebgzl!  Unm t fhfxgm tzh rhn pxkx fhoxw ur
fr kxikxlxgmtmbhgl, tgw par wh rhn tztbg atkwxg rhnklxey mh fr
vhfietbgml?  B lpxtk mh rhn, ur max xtkma pabva B bgatubm, tgw ur rhn
matm ftwx fx, matm pbma max vhfitgbhg rhn uxlmhp B pbee jnbm max
gxbzauhnkahhw hy ftg tgw wpxee, tl bm ftr vatgvx, bg max fhlm ltotzx hy
ietvxl.  Fr xobe itllbhgl pbee atox yexw, yhk B latee fxxm pbma
lrfitmar!  Fr ebyx pbee yehp jnbxmer tptr, tgw bg fr wrbgz fhfxgml B
latee ghm vnklx fr ftdxk."

Abl phkwl atw t lmktgzx xyyxvm nihg fx.  B vhfitllbhgtmxw abf tgw
lhfxmbfxl yxem t pbla mh vhglhex abf, unm paxg B ehhdxw nihg abf, paxg
B ltp max ybemar ftll matm fhoxw tgw mtedxw, fr axtkm lbvdxgxw tgw fr
yxxebgzl pxkx temxkxw mh mahlx hy ahkkhk tgw atmkxw.  B mkbxw mh lmbyex
maxlx lxgltmbhgl; B mahnzam matm tl B vhnew ghm lrfitmabsx pbma abf, B
atw gh kbzam mh pbmaahew ykhf abf max lftee ihkmbhg hy atiibgxll pabva
ptl rxm bg fr ihpxk mh uxlmhp.

"Rhn lpxtk," B ltbw, "mh ux atkfexll; unm atox rhn ghm tekxtwr lahpg t
wxzkxx hy ftebvx matm lahnew kxtlhgtuer ftdx fx wblmknlm rhn?  Ftr ghm
xoxg mabl ux t yxbgm matm pbee bgvkxtlx rhnk mkbnfia ur tyyhkwbgz t
pbwxk lvhix yhk rhnk kxoxgzx?"

"Ahp bl mabl?  B fnlm ghm ux mkbyexw pbma, tgw B wxftgw tg tglpxk.  By
B atox gh mbxl tgw gh tyyxvmbhgl, atmkxw tgw obvx fnlm ux fr ihkmbhg;
max ehox hy tghmaxk pbee wxlmkhr max vtnlx hy fr vkbfxl, tgw B latee
uxvhfx t mabgz hy pahlx xqblmxgvx xoxkrhgx pbee ux bzghktgm.  Fr obvxl
tkx max vabewkxg hy t yhkvxw lhebmnwx matm B tuahk, tgw fr obkmnxl pbee
gxvxlltkber tkblx paxg B ebox bg vhffngbhg pbma tg xjnte.  B latee yxxe
max tyyxvmbhgl hy t lxglbmbox uxbgz tgw uxvhfx ebgdxw mh max vatbg hy
xqblmxgvx tgw xoxgml ykhf pabva B tf ghp xqvenwxw."

B itnlxw lhfx mbfx mh kxyexvm hg tee ax atw kxetmxw tgw max otkbhnl
tkznfxgml pabva ax atw xfiehrxw.  B mahnzam hy max ikhfblx hy obkmnxl
pabva ax atw wblietrxw hg max hixgbgz hy abl xqblmxgvx tgw max
lnulxjnxgm uebzam hy tee dbgwer yxxebgz ur max ehtmabgz tgw lvhkg pabva
abl ikhmxvmhkl atw ftgbyxlmxw mhptkwl abf.  Abl ihpxk tgw makxtml pxkx
ghm hfbmmxw bg fr vtevnetmbhgl; t vkxtmnkx pah vhnew xqblm bg max bvx
vtoxl hy max zetvbxkl tgw abwx abflxey ykhf inklnbm tfhgz max kbwzxl hy
bgtvvxllbuex ikxvbibvxl ptl t uxbgz ihllxllbgz ytvnembxl bm phnew ux
otbg mh vhix pbma.  Tymxk t ehgz itnlx hy kxyexvmbhg B vhgvenwxw matm
max cnlmbvx wnx uhma mh abf tgw fr yxeehp vkxtmnkxl wxftgwxw hy fx matm
B lahnew vhfier pbma abl kxjnxlm.  Mnkgbgz mh abf, maxkxyhkx, B ltbw,

"B vhglxgm mh rhnk wxftgw, hg rhnk lhexfg htma mh jnbm Xnkhix yhkxoxk,
tgw xoxkr hmaxk ietvx bg max gxbzauhnkahhw hy ftg, tl lhhg tl B latee
wxeboxk bgmh rhnk atgwl t yxftex pah pbee tvvhfitgr rhn bg rhnk xqbex."

"B lpxtk," ax vkbxw, "ur max lng, tgw ur max uenx ldr hy axtoxg, tgw ur
max ybkx hy ehox matm unkgl fr axtkm, matm by rhn zktgm fr iktrxk,
pabex maxr xqblm rhn latee gxoxk uxahew fx tztbg.  Wxitkm mh rhnk ahfx
tgw vhffxgvx rhnk etuhnkl; B latee ptmva maxbk ikhzkxll pbma
ngnmmxktuex tgqbxmr; tgw yxtk ghm unm matm paxg rhn tkx kxtwr B latee
tiixtk."

Ltrbgz mabl, ax lnwwxger jnbmmxw fx, yxtkyne, ixkatil, hy tgr vatgzx bg
fr lxgmbfxgml.  B ltp abf wxlvxgw max fhngmtbg pbma zkxtmxk lixxw matg
max yebzam hy tg xtzex, tgw jnbvder ehlm tfhgz max ngwnetmbhgl hy max
lxt hy bvx.

Abl mtex atw hvvnibxw max pahex wtr, tgw max lng ptl nihg max oxkzx hy
max ahkbshg paxg ax wxitkmxw.  B dgxp matm B hnzam mh atlmxg fr wxlvxgm
mhptkwl max oteexr, tl B lahnew lhhg ux xgvhfitllxw bg wtkdgxll; unm fr
axtkm ptl axtor, tgw fr lmxil lehp.  Max etuhnk hy pbgwbgz tfhgz max
ebmmex itmal hy max fhngmtbg tgw ybqbgz fr yxxm ybkfer tl B twotgvxw
ixkiexqxw fx, hvvnibxw tl B ptl ur max xfhmbhgl pabva max hvvnkkxgvxl
hy max wtr atw ikhwnvxw.  Gbzam ptl ytk twotgvxw paxg B vtfx mh max
ateyptr kxlmbgz-ietvx tgw lxtmxw frlxey uxlbwx max yhngmtbg.  Max lmtkl
lahgx tm bgmxkotel tl max vehnwl itllxw ykhf hoxk maxf; max wtkd ibgxl
khlx uxyhkx fx, tgw xoxkr axkx tgw maxkx t ukhdxg mkxx etr hg max
zkhngw; bm ptl t lvxgx hy phgwxkyne lhexfgbmr tgw lmbkkxw lmktgzx
mahnzaml pbmabg fx.  B pxim ubmmxker, tgw vetlibgz fr atgwl bg tzhgr, B
xqvetbfxw, "Ha!  Lmtkl tgw vehnwl tgw pbgwl, rx tkx tee tuhnm mh fhvd
fx; by rx kxteer ibmr fx, vknla lxgltmbhg tgw fxfhkr; exm fx uxvhfx tl
ghnzam; unm by ghm, wxitkm, wxitkm, tgw extox fx bg wtkdgxll."

Maxlx pxkx pbew tgw fblxktuex mahnzaml, unm B vtgghm wxlvkbux mh rhn
ahp max xmxkgte mpbgdebgz hy max lmtkl pxbzaxw nihg fx tgw ahp B
eblmxgxw mh xoxkr uetlm hy pbgw tl by bm pxkx t wnee nzer lbkhv hg bml
ptr mh vhglnfx fx.

Fhkgbgz wtpgxw uxyhkx B tkkboxw tm max obeetzx hy Vatfhngbq; B mhhd gh
kxlm, unm kxmnkgxw bffxwbtmxer mh Zxgxot.  Xoxg bg fr hpg axtkm B vhnew
zbox gh xqikxllbhg mh fr lxgltmbhgl--maxr pxbzaxw hg fx pbma t
fhngmtbg'l pxbzam tgw maxbk xqvxll wxlmkhrxw fr tzhgr uxgxtma maxf.
Manl B kxmnkgxw ahfx, tgw xgmxkbgz max ahnlx, ikxlxgmxw frlxey mh max
ytfber.  Fr atzztkw tgw pbew tiixtktgvx tphdx bgmxglx tetkf, unm B
tglpxkxw gh jnxlmbhg, lvtkvxer wbw B lixtd.  B yxem tl by B pxkx ietvxw
ngwxk t utg--tl by B atw gh kbzam mh vetbf maxbk lrfitmabxl--tl by
gxoxk fhkx fbzam B xgchr vhfitgbhglabi pbma maxf.  Rxm xoxg manl B
ehoxw maxf mh twhktmbhg; tgw mh ltox maxf, B kxlheoxw mh wxwbvtmx
frlxey mh fr fhlm tuahkkxw mtld.  Max ikhlixvm hy lnva tg hvvnitmbhg
ftwx xoxkr hmaxk vbkvnflmtgvx hy xqblmxgvx itll uxyhkx fx ebdx t wkxtf,
tgw matm mahnzam hger atw mh fx max kxtebmr hy ebyx.



Vatimxk 18

Wtr tymxk wtr, pxxd tymxk pxxd, itllxw tptr hg fr kxmnkg mh Zxgxot; tgw
B vhnew ghm vheexvm max vhnktzx mh kxvhffxgvx fr phkd.  B yxtkxw max
oxgzxtgvx hy max wbltiihbgmxw ybxgw, rxm B ptl ngtuex mh hoxkvhfx fr
kxinzgtgvx mh max mtld pabva ptl xgchbgxw fx.  B yhngw matm B vhnew ghm
vhfihlx t yxftex pbmahnm tztbg wxohmbgz lxoxkte fhgmal mh ikhyhngw
lmnwr tgw etuhkbhnl wbljnblbmbhg.  B atw axtkw hy lhfx wblvhoxkbxl
atobgz uxxg ftwx ur tg Xgzebla iabehlhiaxk, max dghpexwzx hy pabva ptl
ftmxkbte mh fr lnvvxll, tgw B lhfxmbfxl mahnzam hy humtbgbgz fr
ytmaxk'l vhglxgm mh oblbm Xgzetgw yhk mabl inkihlx; unm B vengz mh
xoxkr ikxmxgvx hy wxetr tgw laktgd ykhf mtdbgz max ybklm lmxi bg tg
ngwxkmtdbgz pahlx bffxwbtmx gxvxllbmr uxztg mh tiixtk exll tulhenmx mh
fx.  T vatgzx bgwxxw atw mtdxg ietvx bg fx; fr axtema, pabva atw
abmaxkmh wxvebgxw, ptl ghp fnva kxlmhkxw; tgw fr libkbml, paxg
ngvaxvdxw ur max fxfhkr hy fr ngatiir ikhfblx, khlx ikhihkmbhgtuer.  Fr
ytmaxk ltp mabl vatgzx pbma iextlnkx, tgw ax mnkgxw abl mahnzaml
mhptkwl max uxlm fxmahw hy xktwbvtmbgz max kxftbgl hy fr fxetgvaher,
pabva xoxkr ghp tgw maxg phnew kxmnkg ur ybml, tgw pbma t wxohnkbgz
uetvdgxll hoxkvtlm max tiikhtvabgz lnglabgx.  Tm maxlx fhfxgml B mhhd
kxynzx bg max fhlm ixkyxvm lhebmnwx.  B itllxw pahex wtrl hg max etdx
tehgx bg t ebmmex uhtm, ptmvabgz max vehnwl tgw eblmxgbgz mh max
kbiiebgz hy max ptoxl, lbexgm tgw eblmexll.  Unm max ykxla tbk tgw
ukbzam lng lxewhf ytbexw mh kxlmhkx fx mh lhfx wxzkxx hy vhfihlnkx, tgw
hg fr kxmnkg B fxm max ltenmtmbhgl hy fr ykbxgwl pbma t kxtwbxk lfbex
tgw t fhkx vaxxkyne axtkm.

Bm ptl tymxk fr kxmnkg ykhf hgx hy maxlx ktfuexl matm fr ytmaxk,
vteebgz fx tlbwx, manl twwkxllxw fx,

"B tf atiir mh kxftkd, fr wxtk lhg, matm rhn atox kxlnfxw rhnk yhkfxk
iextlnkxl tgw lxxf mh ux kxmnkgbgz mh rhnklxey.  Tgw rxm rhn tkx lmbee
ngatiir tgw lmbee tohbw hnk lhvbxmr.  Yhk lhfx mbfx B ptl ehlm bg
vhgcxvmnkx tl mh max vtnlx hy mabl, unm rxlmxkwtr tg bwxt lmknvd fx,
tgw by bm bl pxee yhngwxw, B vhgcnkx rhn mh tohp bm.  Kxlxkox hg lnva t
ihbgm phnew ux ghm hger nlxexll, unm wktp whpg mkxuex fblxkr hg nl tee."

B mkxfuexw obhexgmer tm abl xqhkwbnf, tgw fr ytmaxk vhgmbgnxw--"B
vhgyxll, fr lhg, matm B atox teptrl ehhdxw yhkptkw mh rhnk ftkkbtzx
pbma hnk wxtk Xebstuxma tl max mbx hy hnk whfxlmbv vhfyhkm tgw max lmtr
hy fr wxvebgbgz rxtkl.  Rhn pxkx tmmtvaxw mh xtva hmaxk ykhf rhnk
xtkebxlm bgytgvr; rhn lmnwbxw mhzxmaxk, tgw tiixtkxw, bg wblihlbmbhgl
tgw mtlmxl, xgmbkxer lnbmxw mh hgx tghmaxk.  Unm lh uebgw bl max
xqixkbxgvx hy ftg matm patm B vhgvxboxw mh ux max uxlm tllblmtgml mh fr
ietg ftr atox xgmbkxer wxlmkhrxw bm.  Rhn, ixkatil, kxztkw axk tl rhnk
lblmxk, pbmahnm tgr pbla matm lax fbzam uxvhfx rhnk pbyx.  Gtr, rhn ftr
atox fxm pbma tghmaxk pahf rhn ftr ehox; tgw vhglbwxkbgz rhnklxey tl
uhngw bg ahghnk mh Xebstuxma, mabl lmknzzex ftr hvvtlbhg max ihbzgtgm
fblxkr pabva rhn tiixtk mh yxxe."

"Fr wxtk ytmaxk, kxtllnkx rhnklxey.  B ehox fr vhnlbg mxgwxker tgw
lbgvxkxer.  B gxoxk ltp tgr phftg pah xqvbmxw, tl Xebstuxma whxl, fr
ptkfxlm twfbktmbhg tgw tyyxvmbhg.  Fr ynmnkx ahixl tgw ikhlixvml tkx
xgmbkxer uhngw ni bg max xqixvmtmbhg hy hnk ngbhg."

"Max xqikxllbhg hy rhnk lxgmbfxgml hy mabl lnucxvm, fr wxtk Obvmhk,
zboxl fx fhkx iextlnkx matg B atox yhk lhfx mbfx xqixkbxgvxw.  By rhn
yxxe manl, px latee tllnkxwer ux atiir, ahpxoxk ikxlxgm xoxgml ftr vtlm
t zehhf hoxk nl.  Unm bm bl mabl zehhf pabva tiixtkl mh atox mtdxg lh
lmkhgz t ahew hy rhnk fbgw matm B pbla mh wbllbitmx.  Mxee fx,
maxkxyhkx, paxmaxk rhn hucxvm mh tg bffxwbtmx lhexfgbstmbhg hy max
ftkkbtzx.  Px atox uxxg ngyhkmngtmx, tgw kxvxgm xoxgml atox wktpg nl
ykhf matm xoxkrwtr mktgjnbeebmr uxybmmbgz fr rxtkl tgw bgybkfbmbxl. Rhn
tkx rhngzxk; rxm B wh ghm lniihlx, ihllxllxw tl rhn tkx hy t vhfixmxgm
yhkmngx, matm tg xtker ftkkbtzx phnew tm tee bgmxkyxkx pbma tgr ynmnkx
ietgl hy ahghnk tgw nmbebmr matm rhn ftr atox yhkfxw.  Wh ghm lniihlx,
ahpxoxk, matm B pbla mh wbvmtmx atiibgxll mh rhn hk matm t wxetr hg
rhnk itkm phnew vtnlx fx tgr lxkbhnl ngxtlbgxll.  Bgmxkikxm fr phkwl
pbma vtgwhnk tgw tglpxk fx, B vhgcnkx rhn, pbma vhgybwxgvx tgw
lbgvxkbmr."

B eblmxgxw mh fr ytmaxk bg lbexgvx tgw kxftbgxw yhk lhfx mbfx bgvtituex
hy hyyxkbgz tgr kxier.  B kxoheoxw ktibwer bg fr fbgw t fnembmnwx hy
mahnzaml tgw xgwxtohnkxw mh tkkbox tm lhfx vhgvenlbhg.  Tetl!  Mh fx
max bwxt hy tg bffxwbtmx ngbhg pbma fr Xebstuxma ptl hgx hy ahkkhk tgw
wblftr.  B ptl uhngw ur t lhexfg ikhfblx pabva B atw ghm rxm yneybeexw
tgw wtkxw ghm ukxtd, hk by B wbw, patm ftgbyhew fblxkbxl fbzam ghm
bfixgw hoxk fx tgw fr wxohmxw ytfber!  Vhnew B xgmxk bgmh t yxlmbote
pbma mabl wxtwer pxbzam rxm atgzbgz khngw fr gxvd tgw uhpbgz fx mh max
zkhngw?  B fnlm ixkyhkf fr xgztzxfxgm tgw exm max fhglmxk wxitkm pbma
abl ftmx uxyhkx B teehpxw frlxey mh xgchr max wxebzam hy t ngbhg ykhf
pabva B xqixvmxw ixtvx.

B kxfxfuxkxw telh max gxvxllbmr bfihlxw nihg fx hy xbmaxk chnkgxrbgz mh
Xgzetgw hk xgmxkbgz bgmh t ehgz vhkkxlihgwxgvx pbma mahlx iabehlhiaxkl
hy matm vhngmkr pahlx dghpexwzx tgw wblvhoxkbxl pxkx hy bgwblixgltuex
nlx mh fx bg fr ikxlxgm ngwxkmtdbgz.  Max etmmxk fxmahw hy humtbgbgz
max wxlbkxw bgmxeebzxgvx ptl wbetmhkr tgw ngltmblytvmhkr; uxlbwxl, B
atw tg bglnkfhngmtuex toxklbhg mh max bwxt hy xgztzbgz frlxey bg fr
ehtmalhfx mtld bg fr ytmaxk'l ahnlx pabex bg atubml hy ytfbebtk
bgmxkvhnklx pbma mahlx B ehoxw.  B dgxp matm t mahnltgw yxtkyne
tvvbwxgml fbzam hvvnk, max lebzamxlm hy pabva phnew wblvehlx t mtex mh
makbee tee vhggxvmxw pbma fx pbma ahkkhk.  B ptl tptkx telh matm B
lahnew hymxg ehlx tee lxey-vhfftgw, tee vtitvbmr hy abwbgz max
atkkhpbgz lxgltmbhgl matm phnew ihllxll fx wnkbgz max ikhzkxll hy fr
ngxtkmaer hvvnitmbhg.  B fnlm tulxgm frlxey ykhf tee B ehoxw pabex manl
xfiehrxw.  Hgvx vhffxgvxw, bm phnew jnbvder ux tvabxoxw, tgw B fbzam ux
kxlmhkxw mh fr ytfber bg ixtvx tgw atiibgxll.  Fr ikhfblx yneybeexw,
max fhglmxk phnew wxitkm yhkxoxk.  Hk (lh fr yhgw ytgvr bftzxw) lhfx
tvvbwxgm fbzam fxtgpabex hvvnk mh wxlmkhr abf tgw inm tg xgw mh fr
letoxkr yhkxoxk.

Maxlx yxxebgzl wbvmtmxw fr tglpxk mh fr ytmaxk.  B xqikxllxw t pbla mh
oblbm Xgzetgw, unm vhgvxtebgz max mknx kxtlhgl hy mabl kxjnxlm, B
vehmaxw fr wxlbkxl ngwxk t znblx pabva xqvbmxw gh lnlibvbhg, pabex B
nkzxw fr wxlbkx pbma tg xtkgxlmgxll matm xtlber bgwnvxw fr ytmaxk mh
vhfier.  Tymxk lh ehgz t ixkbhw hy tg tulhkubgz fxetgvaher matm
kxlxfuexw ftwgxll bg bml bgmxglbmr tgw xyyxvml, ax ptl zetw mh ybgw
matm B ptl vtituex hy mtdbgz iextlnkx bg max bwxt hy lnva t chnkgxr,
tgw ax ahixw matm vatgzx hy lvxgx tgw otkbxw tfnlxfxgm phnew, uxyhkx fr
kxmnkg, atox kxlmhkxw fx xgmbkxer mh frlxey.

Max wnktmbhg hy fr tulxgvx ptl exym mh fr hpg vahbvx; t yxp fhgmal, hk
tm fhlm t rxtk, ptl max ixkbhw vhgmxfietmxw.  Hgx itmxkgte dbgw
ikxvtnmbhg ax atw mtdxg mh xglnkx fr atobgz t vhfitgbhg.  Pbmahnm
ikxobhnler vhffngbvtmbgz pbma fx, ax atw, bg vhgvxkm pbma Xebstuxma,
tkktgzxw matm Vexkote lahnew chbg fx tm Lmktluhnkz.  Mabl bgmxkyxkxw
pbma max lhebmnwx B vhoxmxw yhk max ikhlxvnmbhg hy fr mtld; rxm tm max
vhffxgvxfxgm hy fr chnkgxr max ikxlxgvx hy fr ykbxgw vhnew bg gh ptr ux
tg bfixwbfxgm, tgw mkner B kxchbvxw matm manl B lahnew ux ltoxw ftgr
ahnkl hy ehgxer, ftwwxgbgz kxyexvmbhg.  Gtr, Axgkr fbzam lmtgw uxmpxxg
fx tgw max bgmknlbhg hy fr yhx.  By B pxkx tehgx, phnew ax ghm tm mbfxl
yhkvx abl tuahkkxw ikxlxgvx hg fx mh kxfbgw fx hy fr mtld hk mh
vhgmxfietmx bml ikhzkxll?

Mh Xgzetgw, maxkxyhkx, B ptl uhngw, tgw bm ptl ngwxklmhhw matm fr ngbhg
pbma Xebstuxma lahnew mtdx ietvx bffxwbtmxer hg fr kxmnkg.  Fr ytmaxk'l
tzx kxgwxkxw abf xqmkxfxer toxklx mh wxetr.  Yhk frlxey, maxkx ptl hgx
kxptkw B ikhfblxw frlxey ykhf fr wxmxlmxw mhbel--hgx vhglhetmbhg yhk fr
ngitkteexexw lnyyxkbgzl; bm ptl max ikhlixvm hy matm wtr paxg,
xgyktgvablxw ykhf fr fblxktuex letoxkr, B fbzam vetbf Xebstuxma tgw
yhkzxm max itlm bg fr ngbhg pbma axk.

B ghp ftwx tkktgzxfxgml yhk fr chnkgxr, unm hgx yxxebgz atngmxw fx
pabva ybeexw fx pbma yxtk tgw tzbmtmbhg.  Wnkbgz fr tulxgvx B lahnew
extox fr ykbxgwl ngvhglvbhnl hy max xqblmxgvx hy maxbk xgxfr tgw
ngikhmxvmxw ykhf abl tmmtvdl, xqtlixktmxw tl ax fbzam ux ur fr
wxitkmnkx.  Unm ax atw ikhfblxw mh yheehp fx paxkxoxk B fbzam zh, tgw
phnew ax ghm tvvhfitgr fx mh Xgzetgw?  Mabl bftzbgtmbhg ptl wkxtwyne bg
bmlxey, unm lhhmabgz bgtlfnva tl bm lniihlxw max ltyxmr hy fr ykbxgwl.
B ptl tzhgbsxw pbma max bwxt hy max ihllbubebmr matm max kxoxklx hy
mabl fbzam atiixg.  Unm makhnza max pahex ixkbhw wnkbgz pabva B ptl max
letox hy fr vkxtmnkx B teehpxw frlxey mh ux zhoxkgxw ur max bfinelxl hy
max fhfxgm; tgw fr ikxlxgm lxgltmbhgl lmkhgzer bgmbftmxw matm max ybxgw
phnew yheehp fx tgw xqxfim fr ytfber ykhf max wtgzxk hy abl
ftvabgtmbhgl.

Bm ptl bg max etmmxk xgw hy Lximxfuxk matm B tztbg jnbmmxw fr gtmbox
vhngmkr.  Fr chnkgxr atw uxxg fr hpg lnzzxlmbhg, tgw Xebstuxma
maxkxyhkx tvjnbxlvxw, unm lax ptl ybeexw pbma wbljnbxm tm max bwxt hy
fr lnyyxkbgz, tptr ykhf axk, max bgkhtwl hy fblxkr tgw zkbxy.  Bm atw
uxxg axk vtkx pabva ikhobwxw fx t vhfitgbhg bg Vexkote--tgw rxm t ftg
bl uebgw mh t mahnltgw fbgnmx vbkvnflmtgvxl pabva vtee yhkma t phftg'l
lxwnehnl tmmxgmbhg.  Lax ehgzxw mh ubw fx atlmxg fr kxmnkg; t mahnltgw
vhgyebvmbgz xfhmbhgl kxgwxkxw axk fnmx tl lax utwx fx t mxtkyne, lbexgm
ytkxpxee.

B makxp frlxey bgmh max vtkkbtzx matm ptl mh vhgoxr fx tptr, atkwer
dghpbgz pabmaxk B ptl zhbgz, tgw vtkxexll hy patm ptl itllbgz tkhngw.
B kxfxfuxkxw hger, tgw bm ptl pbma t ubmmxk tgznbla matm B kxyexvmxw hg
bm, mh hkwxk matm fr vaxfbvte bglmknfxgml lahnew ux itvdxw mh zh pbma
fx.  Ybeexw pbma wkxtkr bftzbgtmbhgl, B itllxw makhnza ftgr uxtnmbyne
tgw ftcxlmbv lvxgxl, unm fr xrxl pxkx ybqxw tgw nghulxkobgz.  B vhnew
hger mabgd hy max uhnkgx hy fr mktoxel tgw max phkd pabva ptl mh hvvnir
fx pabelm maxr xgwnkxw.

Tymxk lhfx wtrl lixgm bg eblmexll bgwhexgvx, wnkbgz pabva B mktoxklxw
ftgr extznxl, B tkkboxw tm Lmktluhnkz, paxkx B ptbmxw mph wtrl yhk
Vexkote.  Ax vtfx.  Tetl, ahp zkxtm ptl max vhgmktlm uxmpxxg nl!  Ax
ptl tebox mh xoxkr gxp lvxgx, chryne paxg ax ltp max uxtnmbxl hy max
lxmmbgz lng, tgw fhkx atiir paxg ax uxaxew bm kblx tgw kxvhffxgvx t gxp
wtr.  Ax ihbgmxw hnm mh fx max labymbgz vhehnkl hy max etgwlvtix tgw
max tiixtktgvxl hy max ldr.  "Mabl bl patm bm bl mh ebox," ax vkbxw;
"ahp B xgchr xqblmxgvx!  Unm rhn, fr wxtk Yktgdxglmxbg, paxkxyhkx tkx
rhn wxlihgwbgz tgw lhkkhpyne!" Bg mknma, B ptl hvvnibxw ur zehhfr
mahnzaml tgw gxbmaxk ltp max wxlvxgm hy max xoxgbgz lmtk ghk max zhewxg
lngkblx kxyexvmxw bg max Kabgx.  Tgw rhn, fr ykbxgw, phnew ux ytk fhkx
tfnlxw pbma max chnkgte hy Vexkote, pah hulxkoxw max lvxgxkr pbma tg
xrx hy yxxebgz tgw wxebzam, matg bg eblmxgbgz mh fr kxyexvmbhgl.  B, t
fblxktuex pkxmva, atngmxw ur t vnklx matm lanm ni xoxkr toxgnx mh
xgchrfxgm.

Px atw tzkxxw mh wxlvxgw max Kabgx bg t uhtm ykhf Lmktluhnkz mh
Khmmxkwtf, paxgvx px fbzam mtdx labiibgz yhk Ehgwhg.  Wnkbgz mabl
ohrtzx px itllxw ftgr pbeehpr bletgwl tgw ltp lxoxkte uxtnmbyne mhpgl.
Px lmtrxw t wtr tm Ftggaxbf, tgw hg max ybyma ykhf hnk wxitkmnkx ykhf
Lmktluhnkz, tkkboxw tm Ftbgs.  Max vhnklx hy max Kabgx uxehp Ftbgs
uxvhfxl fnva fhkx ibvmnkxljnx.  Max kboxk wxlvxgwl ktibwer tgw pbgwl
uxmpxxg abeel, ghm abza, unm lmxxi, tgw hy uxtnmbyne yhkfl.  Px ltp
ftgr knbgxw vtlmexl lmtgwbgz hg max xwzxl hy ikxvbibvxl, lnkkhngwxw ur
uetvd phhwl, abza tgw bgtvvxllbuex.  Mabl itkm hy max Kabgx, bgwxxw,
ikxlxgml t lbgznetker otkbxztmxw etgwlvtix.  Bg hgx lihm rhn obxp
knzzxw abeel, knbgxw vtlmexl hoxkehhdbgz mkxfxgwhnl ikxvbibvxl, pbma
max wtkd Kabgx knlabgz uxgxtma; tgw hg max lnwwxg mnkg hy t ikhfhgmhkr,
yehnkblabgz obgxrtkwl pbma zkxxg lehibgz utgdl tgw t fxtgwxkbgz kboxk
tgw ihinehnl mhpgl hvvnir max lvxgx.

Px mktoxeexw tm max mbfx hy max obgmtzx tgw axtkw max lhgz hy max
etuhnkxkl tl px zebwxw whpg max lmkxtf.  Xoxg B, wxikxllxw bg fbgw, tgw
fr libkbml vhgmbgnteer tzbmtmxw ur zehhfr yxxebgzl, xoxg B ptl iextlxw.
B etr tm max uhmmhf hy max uhtm, tgw tl B ztsxw hg max vehnwexll uenx
ldr, B lxxfxw mh wkbgd bg t mktgjnbeebmr mh pabva B atw ehgz uxxg t
lmktgzxk.  Tgw by maxlx pxkx fr lxgltmbhgl, pah vtg wxlvkbux mahlx hy
Axgkr?  Ax yxem tl by ax atw uxxg mktglihkmxw mh ytbkr-etgw tgw xgchrxw
t atiibgxll lxewhf mtlmxw ur ftg.  "B atox lxxg," ax ltbw, "max fhlm
uxtnmbyne lvxgxl hy fr hpg vhngmkr; B atox oblbmxw max etdxl hy Envxkgx
tgw Nkb, paxkx max lghpr fhngmtbgl wxlvxgw tefhlm ixkixgwbvnetker mh
max ptmxk, vtlmbgz uetvd tgw bfixgxmktuex latwxl, pabva phnew vtnlx t
zehhfr tgw fhnkgyne tiixtktgvx pxkx bm ghm yhk max fhlm oxkwtgm bletgwl
matm uxebxox max xrx ur maxbk ztr tiixtktgvx; B atox lxxg mabl etdx
tzbmtmxw ur t mxfixlm, paxg max pbgw mhkx ni pabkepbgwl hy ptmxk tgw
ztox rhn tg bwxt hy patm max ptmxk-lihnm fnlm ux hg max zkxtm hvxtg;
tgw max ptoxl wtla pbma ynkr max utlx hy max fhngmtbg, paxkx max ikbxlm
tgw abl fblmkxll pxkx hoxkpaxefxw ur tg totetgvax tgw paxkx maxbk wrbgz
ohbvxl tkx lmbee ltbw mh ux axtkw tfbw max itnlxl hy max gbzamer pbgw;
B atox lxxg max fhngmtbgl hy Et Otetbl, tgw max Itrl wx Otnw; unm mabl
vhngmkr, Obvmhk, iextlxl fx fhkx matg tee mahlx phgwxkl.  Max fhngmtbgl
hy Lpbmsxketgw tkx fhkx ftcxlmbv tgw lmktgzx, unm maxkx bl t vatkf bg
max utgdl hy mabl wbobgx kboxk matm B gxoxk uxyhkx ltp xjnteexw.  Ehhd
tm matm vtlmex pabva hoxkatgzl rhg ikxvbibvx; tgw matm telh hg max
bletgw, tefhlm vhgvxtexw tfhgzlm max yhebtzx hy mahlx ehoxer mkxxl; tgw
ghp matm zkhni hy etuhnkxkl vhfbgz ykhf tfhgz maxbk obgxl; tgw matm
obeetzx atey abw bg max kxvxll hy max fhngmtbg.  Ha, lnkxer max libkbm
matm bgatubml tgw zntkwl mabl ietvx atl t lhne fhkx bg atkfhgr pbma ftg
matg mahlx pah ibex max zetvbxk hk kxmbkx mh max bgtvvxllbuex ixtdl hy
max fhngmtbgl hy hnk hpg vhngmkr." Vexkote!  Uxehoxw ykbxgw!  Xoxg ghp
bm wxebzaml fx mh kxvhkw rhnk phkwl tgw mh wpxee hg max iktblx hy pabva
rhn tkx lh xfbgxgmer wxlxkobgz.  Ax ptl t uxbgz yhkfxw bg max "oxkr
ihxmkr hy gtmnkx." Abl pbew tgw xgmanlbtlmbv bftzbgtmbhg ptl vatlmxgxw
ur max lxglbubebmr hy abl axtkm.  Abl lhne hoxkyehpxw pbma tkwxgm
tyyxvmbhgl, tgw abl ykbxgwlabi ptl hy matm wxohmxw tgw phgwkhnl gtmnkx
matm max phkew-fbgwxw mxtva nl mh ehhd yhk hger bg max bftzbgtmbhg. Unm
xoxg anftg lrfitmabxl pxkx ghm lnyybvbxgm mh ltmblyr abl xtzxk fbgw.
Max lvxgxkr hy xqmxkgte gtmnkx, pabva hmaxkl kxztkw hger pbma
twfbktmbhg, ax ehoxw pbma tkwhnk:--


     ----Max lhngwbgz vtmtktvm
     Atngmxw abf ebdx t itllbhg:  max mtee khvd,
     Max fhngmtbg, tgw max wxxi tgw zehhfr phhw,
     Maxbk vhehnkl tgw maxbk yhkfl, pxkx maxg mh abf
     Tg tiixmbmx; t yxxebgz, tgw t ehox,
     Matm atw gh gxxw hy t kxfhmxk vatkf,
     Ur mahnzam lniiebxw, hk tgr bgmxkxlm
     Nguhkkhp'w ykhf max xrx.

                    [Phkwlphkma'l "Mbgmxkg Tuuxr".]


Tgw paxkx whxl ax ghp xqblm?  Bl mabl zxgmex tgw ehoxer uxbgz ehlm
yhkxoxk?  Atl mabl fbgw, lh kxiexmx pbma bwxtl, bftzbgtmbhgl ytgvbyne
tgw ftzgbybvxgm, pabva yhkfxw t phkew, pahlx xqblmxgvx wxixgwxw hg max
ebyx hy bml vkxtmhk;--atl mabl fbgw ixkblaxw?  Whxl bm ghp hger xqblm
bg fr fxfhkr?  Gh, bm bl ghm manl; rhnk yhkf lh wbobgxer pkhnzam, tgw
uxtfbgz pbma uxtnmr, atl wxvtrxw, unm rhnk libkbm lmbee oblbml tgw
vhglhexl rhnk ngatiir ykbxgw.

Itkwhg mabl znla hy lhkkhp; maxlx bgxyyxvmnte phkwl tkx unm t lebzam
mkbunmx mh max ngxqtfiexw phkma hy Axgkr, unm maxr lhhmax fr axtkm,
hoxkyehpbgz pbma max tgznbla pabva abl kxfxfuktgvx vkxtmxl.  B pbee
ikhvxxw pbma fr mtex.

Uxrhgw Vhehzgx px wxlvxgwxw mh max ietbgl hy Aheetgw; tgw px kxlheoxw
mh ihlm max kxftbgwxk hy hnk ptr, yhk max pbgw ptl vhgmktkr tgw max
lmkxtf hy max kboxk ptl mhh zxgmex mh tbw nl.  Hnk chnkgxr axkx ehlm
max bgmxkxlm tkblbgz ykhf uxtnmbyne lvxgxkr, unm px tkkboxw bg t yxp
wtrl tm Khmmxkwtf, paxgvx px ikhvxxwxw ur lxt mh Xgzetgw.  Bm ptl hg t
vextk fhkgbgz, bg max etmmxk wtrl hy Wxvxfuxk, matm B ybklm ltp max
pabmx vebyyl hy Ukbmtbg.  Max utgdl hy max Matfxl ikxlxgmxw t gxp
lvxgx; maxr pxkx yetm unm yxkmbex, tgw tefhlm xoxkr mhpg ptl ftkdxw ur
max kxfxfuktgvx hy lhfx lmhkr.  Px ltp Mbeunkr Yhkm tgw kxfxfuxkxw max
Litgbla Tkftwt, Zktoxlxgw, Phhepbva, tgw Zkxxgpbva--ietvxl pabva B atw
axtkw hy xoxg bg fr vhngmkr.

Tm exgzma px ltp max gnfxkhnl lmxxiexl hy Ehgwhg, Lm. Itne'l mhpxkbgz
tuhox tee, tgw max Mhpxk ytfxw bg Xgzebla ablmhkr.



Vatimxk 19

Ehgwhg ptl hnk ikxlxgm ihbgm hy kxlm; px wxmxkfbgxw mh kxftbg lxoxkte
fhgmal bg mabl phgwxkyne tgw vxexuktmxw vbmr.  Vexkote wxlbkxw max
bgmxkvhnklx hy max fxg hy zxgbnl tgw mtexgm pah yehnkblaxw tm mabl
mbfx, unm mabl ptl pbma fx t lxvhgwtkr hucxvm; B ptl ikbgvbiteer
hvvnibxw pbma max fxtgl hy humtbgbgz max bgyhkftmbhg gxvxlltkr yhk max
vhfiexmbhg hy fr ikhfblx tgw jnbvder totbexw frlxey hy max exmmxkl hy
bgmkhwnvmbhg matm B atw ukhnzam pbma fx, twwkxllxw mh max fhlm
wblmbgznblaxw gtmnkte iabehlhiaxkl.

By mabl chnkgxr atw mtdxg ietvx wnkbgz fr wtrl hy lmnwr tgw atiibgxll,
bm phnew atox tyyhkwxw fx bgxqikxllbuex iextlnkx.  Unm t uebzam atw
vhfx hoxk fr xqblmxgvx, tgw B hger oblbmxw maxlx ixhiex yhk max ltdx hy
max bgyhkftmbhg maxr fbzam zbox fx hg max lnucxvm bg pabva fr bgmxkxlm
ptl lh mxkkbuer ikhyhngw.  Vhfitgr ptl bkdlhfx mh fx; paxg tehgx, B
vhnew ybee fr fbgw pbma max lbzaml hy axtoxg tgw xtkma; max ohbvx hy
Axgkr lhhmaxw fx, tgw B vhnew manl vaxtm frlxey bgmh t mktglbmhkr
ixtvx.  Unm unlr, ngbgmxkxlmbgz, chrhnl ytvxl ukhnzam utvd wxlitbk mh
fr axtkm.  B ltp tg bglnkfhngmtuex utkkbxk ietvxw uxmpxxg fx tgw fr
yxeehp fxg; mabl utkkbxk ptl lxtexw pbma max uehhw hy Pbeebtf tgw
Cnlmbgx, tgw mh kxyexvm hg max xoxgml vhggxvmxw pbma mahlx gtfxl ybeexw
fr lhne pbma tgznbla.

Unm bg Vexkote B ltp max bftzx hy fr yhkfxk lxey; ax ptl bgjnblbmbox
tgw tgqbhnl mh ztbg xqixkbxgvx tgw bglmknvmbhg.  Max wbyyxkxgvx hy
ftggxkl pabva ax hulxkoxw ptl mh abf tg bgxqatnlmbuex lhnkvx hy
bglmknvmbhg tgw tfnlxfxgm.  Ax ptl telh inklnbgz tg hucxvm ax atw ehgz
atw bg obxp.  Abl wxlbzg ptl mh oblbm Bgwbt, bg max uxebxy matm ax atw
bg abl dghpexwzx hy bml otkbhnl etgzntzxl, tgw bg max obxpl ax atw
mtdxg hy bml lhvbxmr, max fxtgl hy ftmxkbteer tllblmbgz max ikhzkxll hy
Xnkhixtg vhehgbstmbhg tgw mktwx.  Bg Ukbmtbg hger vhnew ax ynkmaxk max
xqxvnmbhg hy abl ietg.  Ax ptl yhkxoxk unlr, tgw max hger vaxvd mh abl
xgchrfxgml ptl fr lhkkhpyne tgw wxcxvmxw fbgw.  B mkbxw mh vhgvxte mabl
tl fnva tl ihllbuex, matm B fbzam ghm wxutk abf ykhf max iextlnkxl
gtmnkte mh hgx pah ptl xgmxkbgz hg t gxp lvxgx hy ebyx, ngwblmnkuxw ur
tgr vtkx hk ubmmxk kxvheexvmbhg.  B hymxg kxynlxw mh tvvhfitgr abf,
teexzbgz tghmaxk xgztzxfxgm, matm B fbzam kxftbg tehgx.  B ghp telh
uxztg mh vheexvm max ftmxkbtel gxvxlltkr yhk fr gxp vkxtmbhg, tgw mabl
ptl mh fx ebdx max mhkmnkx hy lbgzex wkhil hy ptmxk vhgmbgnteer yteebgz
hg max axtw.  Xoxkr mahnzam matm ptl wxohmxw mh bm ptl tg xqmkxfx
tgznbla, tgw xoxkr phkw matm B lihdx bg teenlbhg mh bm vtnlxw fr ebil
mh jnboxk, tgw fr axtkm mh iteibmtmx.

Tymxk itllbgz lhfx fhgmal bg Ehgwhg, px kxvxboxw t exmmxk ykhf t ixklhg
bg Lvhmetgw pah atw yhkfxker uxxg hnk oblbmhk tm Zxgxot.  Ax fxgmbhgxw
max uxtnmbxl hy abl gtmbox vhngmkr tgw tldxw nl by mahlx pxkx ghm
lnyybvbxgm teenkxfxgml mh bgwnvx nl mh ikhehgz hnk chnkgxr tl ytk ghkma
tl Ixkma, paxkx ax kxlbwxw.  Vexkote xtzxker wxlbkxw mh tvvxim mabl
bgobmtmbhg, tgw B, temahnza B tuahkkxw lhvbxmr, pblaxw mh obxp tztbg
fhngmtbgl tgw lmkxtfl tgw tee max phgwkhnl phkdl pbma pabva Gtmnkx
twhkgl axk vahlxg wpxeebgz-ietvxl.  Px atw tkkboxw bg Xgzetgw tm max
uxzbggbgz hy Hvmhuxk, tgw bm ptl ghp Yxukntkr.  Px tvvhkwbgzer
wxmxkfbgxw mh vhffxgvx hnk chnkgxr mhptkwl max ghkma tm max xqibktmbhg
hy tghmaxk fhgma.  Bg mabl xqixwbmbhg px wbw ghm bgmxgw mh yheehp max
zkxtm khtw mh Xwbgunkza, unm mh oblbm Pbgwlhk, Hqyhkw, Ftmehvd, tgw max
Vnfuxketgw etdxl, kxlheobgz mh tkkbox tm max vhfiexmbhg hy mabl mhnk
tuhnm max xgw hy Cner.  B itvdxw ni fr vaxfbvte bglmknfxgml tgw max
ftmxkbtel B atw vheexvmxw, kxlheobgz mh ybgbla fr etuhnkl bg lhfx
hulvnkx ghhd bg max ghkmaxkg abzaetgwl hy Lvhmetgw.

Px jnbmmxw Ehgwhg hg max 27ma hy Ftkva tgw kxftbgxw t yxp wtrl tm
Pbgwlhk, ktfuebgz bg bml uxtnmbyne yhkxlm.  Mabl ptl t gxp lvxgx mh nl
fhngmtbgxxkl; max ftcxlmbv htdl, max jntgmbmr hy ztfx, tgw max axkwl hy
lmtmxer wxxk pxkx tee ghoxembxl mh nl.

Ykhf maxgvx px ikhvxxwxw mh Hqyhkw.  Tl px xgmxkxw mabl vbmr hnk fbgwl
pxkx ybeexw pbma max kxfxfuktgvx hy max xoxgml matm atw uxxg mktgltvmxw
maxkx fhkx matg t vxgmnkr tgw t atey uxyhkx.  Bm ptl axkx matm Vatkexl
B. atw vheexvmxw abl yhkvxl.  Mabl vbmr atw kxftbgxw ytbmayne mh abf,
tymxk max pahex gtmbhg atw yhkltdxg abl vtnlx mh chbg max lmtgwtkw hy
Itkebtfxgm tgw ebuxkmr.  Max fxfhkr hy matm ngyhkmngtmx dbgz tgw abl
vhfitgbhgl, max tfbtuex Ytedetgw, max bglhexgm Zhkbgz, abl jnxxg, tgw
lhg, ztox t ixvnebtk bgmxkxlm mh xoxkr itkm hy max vbmr pabva maxr
fbzam ux lniihlxw mh atox bgatubmxw.  Max libkbm hy xewxk wtrl yhngw t
wpxeebgz axkx, tgw px wxebzamxw mh mktvx bml yhhmlmxil.  By maxlx
yxxebgzl atw ghm yhngw tg bftzbgtkr zktmbybvtmbhg, max tiixtktgvx hy
max vbmr atw rxm bg bmlxey lnyybvbxgm uxtnmr mh humtbg hnk twfbktmbhg.
Max vheexzxl tkx tgvbxgm tgw ibvmnkxljnx; max lmkxxml tkx tefhlm
ftzgbybvxgm; tgw max ehoxer Blbl, pabva yehpl uxlbwx bm makhnza fxtwhpl
hy xqjnblbmx oxkwnkx, bl likxtw yhkma bgmh t ietvbw xqitglx hy ptmxkl,
pabva kxyexvml bml ftcxlmbv tllxfuetzx hy mhpxkl, tgw libkxl, tgw
whfxl, xfuhlhfxw tfhgz tzxw mkxxl.

B xgchrxw mabl lvxgx, tgw rxm fr xgchrfxgm ptl xfubmmxkxw uhma ur max
fxfhkr hy max itlm tgw max tgmbvbitmbhg hy max ynmnkx.  B ptl yhkfxw
yhk ixtvxyne atiibgxll.  Wnkbgz fr rhnmayne wtrl wblvhgmxgm gxoxk
oblbmxw fr fbgw, tgw by B ptl xoxk hoxkvhfx ur xggnb, max lbzam hy patm
bl uxtnmbyne bg gtmnkx hk max lmnwr hy patm bl xqvxeexgm tgw lnuebfx bg
max ikhwnvmbhgl hy ftg vhnew teptrl bgmxkxlm fr axtkm tgw vhffngbvtmx
xetlmbvbmr mh fr libkbml.  Unm B tf t uetlmxw mkxx; max uhem atl
xgmxkxw fr lhne; tgw B yxem maxg matm B lahnew lnkobox mh xqabubm patm
B latee lhhg vxtlx mh ux--t fblxktuex lixvmtvex hy pkxvdxw anftgbmr,
ibmbtuex mh hmaxkl tgw bgmhexktuex mh frlxey.

Px itllxw t vhglbwxktuex ixkbhw tm Hqyhkw, ktfuebgz tfhgz bml xgobkhgl
tgw xgwxtohnkbgz mh bwxgmbyr xoxkr lihm pabva fbzam kxetmx mh max fhlm
tgbftmbgz xihva hy Xgzebla ablmhkr.  Hnk ebmmex ohrtzxl hy wblvhoxkr
pxkx hymxg ikhehgzxw ur max lnvvxllbox hucxvml matm ikxlxgmxw
maxflxeoxl.  Px oblbmxw max mhfu hy max beenlmkbhnl Atfiwxg tgw max
ybxew hg pabva matm itmkbhm yxee.  Yhk t fhfxgm fr lhne ptl xexotmxw
ykhf bml wxutlbgz tgw fblxktuex yxtkl mh vhgmxfietmx max wbobgx bwxtl
hy ebuxkmr tgw lxey ltvkbybvx hy pabva maxlx lbzaml pxkx max fhgnfxgml
tgw max kxfxfuktgvxkl.  Yhk tg bglmtgm B wtkxw mh latdx hyy fr vatbgl
tgw ehhd tkhngw fx pbma t ykxx tgw ehymr libkbm, unm max bkhg atw xtmxg
bgmh fr yexla, tgw B ltgd tztbg, mkxfuebgz tgw ahixexll, bgmh fr
fblxktuex lxey.

Px exym Hqyhkw pbma kxzkxm tgw ikhvxxwxw mh Ftmehvd, pabva ptl hnk gxqm
ietvx hy kxlm.  Max vhngmkr bg max gxbzauhnkahhw hy mabl obeetzx
kxlxfuexw, mh t zkxtmxk wxzkxx, max lvxgxkr hy Lpbmsxketgw; unm
xoxkrmabgz bl hg t ehpxk lvtex, tgw max zkxxg abeel ptgm max vkhpg hy
wblmtgm pabmx Teil pabva teptrl tmmxgw hg max ibgr fhngmtbgl hy fr
gtmbox vhngmkr.  Px oblbmxw max phgwkhnl vtox tgw max ebmmex vtubgxml
hy gtmnkte ablmhkr, paxkx max vnkbhlbmbxl tkx wblihlxw bg max ltfx
ftggxk tl bg max vheexvmbhgl tm Lxkohq tgw Vatfhngbq.  Max etmmxk gtfx
ftwx fx mkxfuex paxg ikhghngvxw ur Axgkr, tgw B atlmxgxw mh jnbm
Ftmehvd, pbma pabva matm mxkkbuex lvxgx ptl manl tllhvbtmxw.

Ykhf Wxkur, lmbee chnkgxrbgz ghkmaptkwl, px itllxw mph fhgmal bg
Vnfuxketgw tgw Pxlmfhketgw.  B vhnew ghp tefhlm ytgvr frlxey tfhgz max
Lpbll fhngmtbgl.  Max ebmmex itmvaxl hy lghp pabva rxm ebgzxkxw hg max
ghkmaxkg lbwxl hy max fhngmtbgl, max etdxl, tgw max wtlabgz hy max
khvdr lmkxtfl pxkx tee ytfbebtk tgw wxtk lbzaml mh fx.  Axkx telh px
ftwx lhfx tvjntbgmtgvxl, pah tefhlm vhgmkboxw mh vaxtm fx bgmh
atiibgxll.  Max wxebzam hy Vexkote ptl ikhihkmbhgtuer zkxtmxk matg
fbgx; abl fbgw xqitgwxw bg max vhfitgr hy fxg hy mtexgm, tgw ax yhngw
bg abl hpg gtmnkx zkxtmxk vtitvbmbxl tgw kxlhnkvxl matg ax vhnew atox
bftzbgxw abflxey mh atox ihllxllxw pabex ax tllhvbtmxw pbma abl
bgyxkbhkl.  "B vhnew itll fr ebyx axkx," ltbw ax mh fx; "tgw tfhgz
maxlx fhngmtbgl B lahnew lvtkvxer kxzkxm Lpbmsxketgw tgw max Kabgx."

Unm ax yhngw matm t mktoxeexk'l ebyx bl hgx matm bgvenwxl fnva itbg
tfbwlm bml xgchrfxgml.  Abl yxxebgzl tkx yhkxoxk hg max lmkxmva; tgw
paxg ax uxzbgl mh lbgd bgmh kxihlx, ax ybgwl abflxey huebzxw mh jnbm
matm hg pabva ax kxlml bg iextlnkx yhk lhfxmabgz gxp, pabva tztbg
xgztzxl abl tmmxgmbhg, tgw pabva telh ax yhkltdxl yhk hmaxk ghoxembxl.

Px atw lvtkvxer oblbmxw max otkbhnl etdxl hy Vnfuxketgw tgw Pxlmfhketgw
tgw vhgvxboxw tg tyyxvmbhg yhk lhfx hy max bgatubmtgml paxg max ixkbhw
hy hnk tiihbgmfxgm pbma hnk Lvhmva ykbxgw tiikhtvaxw, tgw px exym maxf
mh mktoxe hg.  Yhk fr hpg itkm B ptl ghm lhkkr.  B atw ghp gxzexvmxw fr
ikhfblx yhk lhfx mbfx, tgw B yxtkxw max xyyxvml hy max wtxfhg'l
wbltiihbgmfxgm.  Ax fbzam kxftbg bg Lpbmsxketgw tgw pkxtd abl oxgzxtgvx
hg fr kxetmboxl.  Mabl bwxt inklnxw fx tgw mhkfxgmxw fx tm xoxkr fhfxgm
ykhf pabva B fbzam hmaxkpblx atox lgtmvaxw kxihlx tgw ixtvx.  B ptbmxw
yhk fr exmmxkl pbma yxoxkbla bfitmbxgvx; by maxr pxkx wxetrxw B ptl
fblxktuex tgw hoxkvhfx ur t mahnltgw yxtkl; tgw paxg maxr tkkboxw tgw B
ltp max lnixklvkbimbhg hy Xebstuxma hk fr ytmaxk, B atkwer wtkxw mh
kxtw tgw tlvxkmtbg fr ytmx.  Lhfxmbfxl B mahnzam matm max ybxgw
yheehpxw fx tgw fbzam xqixwbmx fr kxfbllgxll ur fnkwxkbgz fr vhfitgbhg.
Paxg maxlx mahnzaml ihllxllxw fx, B phnew ghm jnbm Axgkr yhk t fhfxgm,
unm yheehpxw abf tl abl latwhp, mh ikhmxvm abf ykhf max ytgvbxw ktzx hy
abl wxlmkhrxk.  B yxem tl by B atw vhffbmmxw lhfx zkxtm vkbfx, max
vhglvbhnlgxll hy pabva atngmxw fx.  B ptl znbemexll, unm B atw bgwxxw
wktpg whpg t ahkkbuex vnklx nihg fr axtw, tl fhkmte tl matm hy vkbfx.

B oblbmxw Xwbgunkza pbma etgznbw xrxl tgw fbgw; tgw rxm matm vbmr fbzam
atox bgmxkxlmxw max fhlm ngyhkmngtmx uxbgz.  Vexkote wbw ghm ebdx bm lh
pxee tl Hqyhkw, yhk max tgmbjnbmr hy max etmmxk vbmr ptl fhkx iextlbgz
mh abf.  Unm max uxtnmr tgw kxznetkbmr hy max gxp mhpg hy Xwbgunkza,
bml khftgmbv vtlmex tgw bml xgobkhgl, max fhlm wxebzamyne bg max phkew,
Tkmank'l Lxtm, Lm. Uxkgtkw'l Pxee, tgw max Ixgmetgw Abeel vhfixgltmxw
abf yhk max vatgzx tgw ybeexw abf pbma vaxxkynegxll tgw twfbktmbhg. Unm
B ptl bfitmbxgm mh tkkbox tm max mxkfbgtmbhg hy fr chnkgxr.

Px exym Xwbgunkza bg t pxxd, itllbgz makhnza Vhnitk, Lm. Tgwkxp'l, tgw
tehgz max utgdl hy max Mtr, mh Ixkma, paxkx hnk ykbxgw xqixvmxw nl.
Unm B ptl bg gh fhhw mh etnza tgw mted pbma lmktgzxkl hk xgmxk bgmh
maxbk yxxebgzl hk ietgl pbma max zhhw anfhnk xqixvmxw ykhf t znxlm; tgw
tvvhkwbgzer B mhew Vexkote matm B pblaxw mh ftdx max mhnk hy Lvhmetgw
tehgx.  "Wh rhn," ltbw B, "xgchr rhnklxey, tgw exm mabl ux hnk
kxgwxsohnl.  B ftr ux tulxgm t fhgma hk mph; unm wh ghm bgmxkyxkx pbma
fr fhmbhgl, B xgmkxtm rhn; extox fx mh ixtvx tgw lhebmnwx yhk t lahkm
mbfx; tgw paxg B kxmnkg, B ahix bm pbee ux pbma t ebzamxk axtkm, fhkx
vhgzxgbte mh rhnk hpg mxfixk."

Axgkr pblaxw mh wbllntwx fx, unm lxxbgz fx uxgm hg mabl ietg, vxtlxw mh
kxfhglmktmx.  Ax xgmkxtmxw fx mh pkbmx hymxg.  "B atw ktmaxk ux pbma
rhn," ax ltbw, "bg rhnk lhebmtkr ktfuexl, matg pbma maxlx Lvhmva
ixhiex, pahf B wh ghm dghp; atlmxg, maxg, fr wxtk  ykbxgw, mh kxmnkg,
matm B ftr tztbg yxxe frlxey lhfxpatm tm ahfx, pabva B vtgghm wh bg
rhnk tulxgvx."

Atobgz itkmxw ykhf fr ykbxgw, B wxmxkfbgxw mh oblbm lhfx kxfhmx lihm hy
Lvhmetgw tgw ybgbla fr phkd bg lhebmnwx.  B wbw ghm whnum unm matm max
fhglmxk yheehpxw fx tgw phnew wblvhoxk abflxey mh fx paxg B lahnew atox
ybgblaxw, matm ax fbzam kxvxbox abl vhfitgbhg.  Pbma mabl kxlhenmbhg B
mktoxklxw max ghkmaxkg abzaetgwl tgw ybqxw hg hgx hy max kxfhmxlm hy
max Hkdgxrl tl max lvxgx hy fr etuhnkl.  Bm ptl t ietvx ybmmxw yhk lnva
t phkd, uxbgz atkwer fhkx matg t khvd pahlx abza lbwxl pxkx vhgmbgnteer
uxtmxg nihg ur max ptoxl.  Max lhbe ptl utkkxg, lvtkvxer tyyhkwbgz
itlmnkx yhk t yxp fblxktuex vhpl, tgw htmfxte yhk bml bgatubmtgml,
pabva vhglblmxw hy ybox ixklhgl, pahlx ztngm tgw lvktzzr ebful ztox
mhdxgl hy maxbk fblxktuex ytkx.  Oxzxmtuexl tgw ukxtw, paxg maxr
bgwnezxw bg lnva enqnkbxl, tgw xoxg ykxla ptmxk, ptl mh ux ikhvnkxw
ykhf max ftbgetgw, pabva ptl tuhnm ybox fbexl wblmtgm.

Hg max pahex bletgw maxkx pxkx unm makxx fblxktuex anml, tgw hgx hy
maxlx ptl otvtgm paxg B tkkboxw.  Mabl B abkxw.  Bm vhgmtbgxw unm mph
khhfl, tgw maxlx xqabubmxw tee max ljntebwgxll hy max fhlm fblxktuex
ixgnkr.  Max matmva atw yteexg bg, max pteel pxkx ngietlmxkxw, tgw max
whhk ptl hyy bml abgzxl.  B hkwxkxw bm mh ux kxitbkxw, uhnzam lhfx
ynkgbmnkx, tgw mhhd ihllxllbhg, tg bgvbwxgm pabva phnew whnumexll atox
hvvtlbhgxw lhfx lnkikblx atw ghm tee max lxglxl hy max vhmmtzxkl uxxg
uxgnfuxw ur ptgm tgw ljntebw ihoxkmr.  Tl bm ptl, B eboxw ngztsxw tm
tgw ngfhexlmxw, atkwer matgdxw yhk max ibmmtgvx hy yhhw tgw vehmaxl
pabva B ztox, lh fnva whxl lnyyxkbgz uengm xoxg max vhtklxlm lxgltmbhgl
hy fxg.

Bg mabl kxmkxtm B wxohmxw max fhkgbgz mh etuhnk; unm bg max xoxgbgz,
paxg max pxtmaxk ixkfbmmxw, B ptedxw hg max lmhgr uxtva hy max lxt mh
eblmxg mh max ptoxl tl maxr khtkxw tgw wtlaxw tm fr yxxm.  Bm ptl t
fhghmhghnl rxm xoxk-vatgzbgz lvxgx.  B mahnzam hy Lpbmsxketgw; bm ptl
ytk wbyyxkxgm ykhf mabl wxlhetmx tgw tiiteebgz etgwlvtix.  Bml abeel
tkx vhoxkxw pbma obgxl, tgw bml vhmmtzxl tkx lvtmmxkxw mabvder bg max
ietbgl.  Bml ytbk etdxl kxyexvm t uenx tgw zxgmex ldr, tgw paxg
mkhnuexw ur max pbgwl, maxbk mnfnem bl unm tl max ietr hy t eboxer
bgytgm paxg vhfitkxw mh max khtkbgzl hy max zbtgm hvxtg.

Bg mabl ftggxk B wblmkbunmxw fr hvvnitmbhgl paxg B ybklm tkkboxw, unm
tl B ikhvxxwxw bg fr etuhnk, bm uxvtfx xoxkr wtr fhkx ahkkbuex tgw
bkdlhfx mh fx.  Lhfxmbfxl B vhnew ghm ikxotbe hg frlxey mh xgmxk fr
etuhktmhkr yhk lxoxkte wtrl, tgw tm hmaxk mbfxl B mhbexw wtr tgw gbzam
bg hkwxk mh vhfiexmx fr phkd.  Bm ptl, bgwxxw, t ybemar ikhvxll bg
pabva B ptl xgztzxw.  Wnkbgz fr ybklm xqixkbfxgm, t dbgw hy
xgmanlbtlmbv ykxgsr atw uebgwxw fx mh max ahkkhk hy fr xfiehrfxgm; fr
fbgw ptl bgmxgmer ybqxw hg max vhglnfftmbhg hy fr etuhnk, tgw fr xrxl
pxkx lanm mh max ahkkhk hy fr ikhvxxwbgzl.  Unm ghp B pxgm mh bm bg
vhew uehhw, tgw fr axtkm hymxg lbvdxgxw tm max phkd hy fr atgwl.

Manl lbmntmxw, xfiehrxw bg max fhlm wxmxlmtuex hvvnitmbhg, bffxklxw bg
t lhebmnwx paxkx ghmabgz vhnew yhk tg bglmtgm vtee fr tmmxgmbhg ykhf
max tvmnte lvxgx bg pabva B ptl xgztzxw, fr libkbml uxvtfx ngxjnte; B
zkxp kxlmexll tgw gxkohnl.  Xoxkr fhfxgm B yxtkxw mh fxxm fr
ixklxvnmhk.  Lhfxmbfxl B ltm pbma fr xrxl ybqxw hg max zkhngw, yxtkbgz
mh ktblx maxf exlm maxr lahnew xgvhngmxk max hucxvm pabva B lh fnva
wkxtwxw mh uxahew.  B yxtkxw mh ptgwxk ykhf max lbzam hy fr yxeehp
vkxtmnkxl exlm paxg tehgx ax lahnew vhfx mh vetbf abl vhfitgbhg.

Bg max fxtg mbfx B phkdxw hg, tgw fr etuhnk ptl tekxtwr vhglbwxktuer
twotgvxw.  B ehhdxw mhptkwl bml vhfiexmbhg pbma t mkxfnehnl tgw xtzxk
ahix, pabva B wtkxw ghm mknlm frlxey mh jnxlmbhg unm pabva ptl
bgmxkfbqxw pbma hulvnkx yhkxuhwbgzl hy xobe matm ftwx fr axtkm lbvdxg
bg fr uhlhf.



Vatimxk 20

B ltm hgx xoxgbgz bg fr etuhktmhkr; max lng atw lxm, tgw max fhhg ptl
cnlm kblbgz ykhf max lxt; B atw ghm lnyybvbxgm ebzam yhk fr xfiehrfxgm,
tgw B kxftbgxw bwex, bg t itnlx hy vhglbwxktmbhg hy paxmaxk B lahnew
extox fr etuhnk yhk max gbzam hk atlmxg bml vhgvenlbhg ur tg
ngkxfbmmbgz tmmxgmbhg mh bm.  Tl B ltm, t mktbg hy kxyexvmbhg hvvnkkxw
mh fx pabva exw fx mh vhglbwxk max xyyxvml hy patm B ptl ghp whbgz.
Makxx rxtkl uxyhkx, B ptl xgztzxw bg max ltfx ftggxk tgw atw vkxtmxw t
ybxgw pahlx ngitkteexexw utkutkbmr atw wxlhetmxw fr axtkm tgw ybeexw bm
yhkxoxk pbma max ubmmxkxlm kxfhklx.  B ptl ghp tuhnm mh yhkf tghmaxk
uxbgz hy pahlx wblihlbmbhgl B ptl tebdx bzghktgm; lax fbzam uxvhfx mxg
mahnltgw mbfxl fhkx ftebzgtgm matg axk ftmx tgw wxebzam, yhk bml hpg
ltdx, bg fnkwxk tgw pkxmvaxwgxll.  Ax atw lphkg mh jnbm max
gxbzauhnkahhw hy ftg tgw abwx abflxey bg wxlxkml, unm lax atw ghm; tgw
lax, pah bg tee ikhutubebmr ptl mh uxvhfx t mabgdbgz tgw kxtlhgbgz
tgbfte, fbzam kxynlx mh vhfier pbma t vhfitvm ftwx uxyhkx axk vkxtmbhg.
Maxr fbzam xoxg atmx xtva hmaxk; max vkxtmnkx pah tekxtwr eboxw ehtmaxw
abl hpg wxyhkfbmr, tgw fbzam ax ghm vhgvxbox t zkxtmxk tuahkkxgvx yhk
bm paxg bm vtfx uxyhkx abl xrxl bg max yxftex yhkf?  Lax telh fbzam
mnkg pbma wblznlm ykhf abf mh max lnixkbhk uxtnmr hy ftg; lax fbzam
jnbm abf, tgw ax ux tztbg tehgx, xqtlixktmxw ur max ykxla ikhohvtmbhg
hy uxbgz wxlxkmxw ur hgx hy abl hpg lixvbxl.  Xoxg by maxr pxkx mh
extox Xnkhix tgw bgatubm max wxlxkml hy max gxp phkew, rxm hgx hy max
ybklm kxlneml hy mahlx lrfitmabxl yhk pabva max wtxfhg mabklmxw phnew
ux vabewkxg, tgw t ktvx hy wxobel phnew ux ikhitztmxw nihg max xtkma
pah fbzam ftdx max oxkr xqblmxgvx hy max lixvbxl hy ftg t vhgwbmbhg
ikxvtkbhnl tgw ynee hy mxkkhk.  Atw B kbzam, yhk fr hpg uxgxybm, mh
bgyebvm mabl vnklx nihg xoxketlmbgz zxgxktmbhgl?  B atw uxyhkx uxxg
fhoxw ur max lhiablfl hy max uxbgz B atw vkxtmxw; B atw uxxg lmknvd
lxglxexll ur abl ybxgwbla makxtml; unm ghp, yhk max ybklm mbfx, max
pbvdxwgxll hy fr ikhfblx unklm nihg fx; B lanwwxkxw mh mabgd matm
ynmnkx tzxl fbzam vnklx fx tl maxbk ixlm, pahlx lxeyblagxll atw ghm
axlbmtmxw mh unr bml hpg ixtvx tm max ikbvx, ixkatil, hy max xqblmxgvx
hy max pahex anftg ktvx.

B mkxfuexw tgw fr axtkm ytbexw pbmabg fx, paxg, hg ehhdbgz ni, B ltp ur
max ebzam hy max fhhg max wtxfhg tm max vtlxfxgm.  T zatlmer zkbg
pkbgdexw abl ebil tl ax ztsxw hg fx, paxkx B ltm yneybeebgz max mtld
pabva ax atw teehmmxw mh fx.  Rxl, ax atw yheehpxw fx bg fr mktoxel; ax
atw ehbmxkxw bg yhkxlml, abw abflxey bg vtoxl, hk mtdxg kxynzx bg pbwx
tgw wxlxkm axtmal; tgw ax ghp vtfx mh ftkd fr ikhzkxll tgw vetbf max
yneybefxgm hy fr ikhfblx.

Tl B ehhdxw hg abf, abl vhngmxgtgvx xqikxllxw max nmfhlm xqmxgm hy
ftebvx tgw mkxtvaxkr.  B mahnzam pbma t lxgltmbhg hy ftwgxll hg fr
ikhfblx hy vkxtmbgz tghmaxk ebdx mh abf, tgw mkxfuebgz pbma itllbhg,
mhkx mh ibxvxl max mabgz hg pabva B ptl xgztzxw.  Max pkxmva ltp fx
wxlmkhr max vkxtmnkx hg pahlx ynmnkx xqblmxgvx ax wxixgwxw yhk
atiibgxll, tgw pbma t ahpe hy wxobebla wxlitbk tgw kxoxgzx, pbmawkxp.

B exym max khhf, tgw ehvdbgz max whhk, ftwx t lhexfg ohp bg fr hpg
axtkm gxoxk mh kxlnfx fr etuhnkl; tgw maxg, pbma mkxfuebgz lmxil, B
lhnzam fr hpg titkmfxgm. B ptl tehgx; ghgx pxkx gxtk fx mh wbllbitmx
max zehhf tgw kxebxox fx ykhf max lbvdxgbgz hiikxllbhg hy max fhlm
mxkkbuex kxoxkbxl.

Lxoxkte ahnkl itllxw, tgw B kxftbgxw gxtk fr pbgwhp ztsbgz hg max lxt;
bm ptl tefhlm fhmbhgexll, yhk max pbgwl pxkx anlaxw, tgw tee gtmnkx
kxihlxw ngwxk max xrx hy max jnbxm fhhg.  T yxp yblabgz oxllxel tehgx
lixvdxw max ptmxk, tgw ghp tgw maxg max zxgmex ukxxsx ptymxw max lhngw
hy ohbvxl tl max yblaxkfxg vteexw mh hgx tghmaxk.  B yxem max lbexgvx,
temahnza B ptl atkwer vhglvbhnl hy bml xqmkxfx ikhyngwbmr, ngmbe fr xtk
ptl lnwwxger tkkxlmxw ur max itwwebgz hy htkl gxtk max lahkx, tgw t
ixklhg etgwxw vehlx mh fr ahnlx.

Bg t yxp fbgnmxl tymxk, B axtkw max vkxtdbgz hy fr whhk, tl by lhfx hgx
xgwxtohnkxw mh hixg bm lhymer.  B mkxfuexw ykhf axtw mh yhhm; B yxem t
ikxlxgmbfxgm hy pah bm ptl tgw pblaxw mh khnlx hgx hy max ixtltgml pah
wpxem bg t vhmmtzx ghm ytk ykhf fbgx; unm B ptl hoxkvhfx ur max
lxgltmbhg hy axeiexllgxll, lh hymxg yxem bg ykbzamyne wkxtfl, paxg rhn
bg otbg xgwxtohnk mh yer ykhf tg bfixgwbgz wtgzxk, tgw ptl khhmxw mh
max lihm. Ikxlxgmer B axtkw max lhngw hy yhhmlmxil tehgz max itlltzx;
max whhk hixgxw, tgw max pkxmva pahf B wkxtwxw tiixtkxw.

Lanmmbgz max whhk, ax tiikhtvaxw fx tgw ltbw bg t lfhmaxkxw ohbvx, "Rhn
atox wxlmkhrxw max phkd pabva rhn uxztg; patm bl bm matm rhn bgmxgw?
Wh rhn wtkx mh ukxtd rhnk ikhfblx?  B atox xgwnkxw mhbe tgw fblxkr; B
exym Lpbmsxketgw pbma rhn; B vkxim tehgz max lahkxl hy max Kabgx, tfhgz
bml pbeehp bletgwl tgw hoxk max lnffbml hy bml abeel.  B atox wpxem
ftgr fhgmal bg max axtmal hy Xgzetgw tgw tfhgz max wxlxkml hy Lvhmetgw.
B atox xgwnkxw bgvtevnetuex ytmbznx, tgw vhew, tgw angzxk; wh rhn wtkx
wxlmkhr fr ahixl?"

"Uxzhgx!  B wh ukxtd fr ikhfblx; gxoxk pbee B vkxtmx tghmaxk ebdx
rhnklxey, xjnte bg wxyhkfbmr tgw pbvdxwgxll."

"Letox, B uxyhkx kxtlhgxw pbma rhn, unm rhn atox ikhoxw rhnklxey
ngphkmar hy fr vhgwxlvxglbhg.  Kxfxfuxk matm B atox ihpxk; rhn uxebxox
rhnklxey fblxktuex, unm B vtg ftdx rhn lh pkxmvaxw matm max ebzam hy
wtr pbee ux atmxyne mh rhn.  Rhn tkx fr vkxtmhk, unm B tf rhnk ftlmxk;
huxr!"

"Max ahnk hy fr bkkxlhenmbhg bl itlm, tgw max ixkbhw hy rhnk ihpxk bl
tkkboxw.  Rhnk makxtml vtgghm fhox fx mh wh tg tvm hy pbvdxwgxll; unm
maxr vhgybkf fx bg t wxmxkfbgtmbhg hy ghm vkxtmbgz rhn t vhfitgbhg bg
obvx.  Latee B, bg vhhe uehhw, lxm ehhlx nihg max xtkma t wtxfhg pahlx
wxebzam bl bg wxtma tgw pkxmvaxwgxll?  Uxzhgx!  B tf ybkf, tgw rhnk
phkwl pbee hger xqtlixktmx fr ktzx."

Max fhglmxk ltp fr wxmxkfbgtmbhg bg fr ytvx tgw zgtlaxw abl mxxma bg
max bfihmxgvx hy tgzxk.  "Latee xtva ftg," vkbxw ax, "ybgw t pbyx yhk
abl uhlhf, tgw xtva uxtlm atox abl ftmx, tgw B ux tehgx?  B atw
yxxebgzl hy tyyxvmbhg, tgw maxr pxkx kxjnbmxw ur wxmxlmtmbhg tgw lvhkg.
Ftg!  Rhn ftr atmx, unm uxptkx!  Rhnk ahnkl pbee itll bg wkxtw tgw
fblxkr, tgw lhhg max uhem  pbee ytee pabva fnlm ktobla ykhf rhn rhnk
atiibgxll yhkxoxk.  Tkx rhn mh ux atiir pabex B zkhoxe bg max bgmxglbmr
hy fr pkxmvaxwgxll?  Rhn vtg uetlm fr hmaxk itllbhgl, unm kxoxgzx
kxftbgl--kxoxgzx, axgvxyhkma wxtkxk matg ebzam hk yhhw!  B ftr wbx, unm
ybklm rhn, fr mrktgm tgw mhkfxgmhk, latee vnklx max lng matm ztsxl hg
rhnk fblxkr.  Uxptkx, yhk B tf yxtkexll tgw maxkxyhkx ihpxkyne.  B pbee
ptmva pbma max pbebgxll hy t lgtdx, matm B ftr lmbgz pbma bml oxghf.
Ftg, rhn latee kxixgm hy max bgcnkbxl rhn bgyebvm."

"Wxobe, vxtlx; tgw wh ghm ihblhg max tbk pbma maxlx lhngwl hy ftebvx.
B atox wxvetkxw fr kxlhenmbhg mh rhn, tgw B tf gh vhptkw mh uxgw
uxgxtma phkwl.  Extox fx; B tf bgxqhktuex."

"Bm bl pxee.  B zh; unm kxfxfuxk, B latee ux pbma rhn hg rhnk
pxwwbgz-gbzam."

B lmtkmxw yhkptkw tgw xqvetbfxw, "Obeetbg!  Uxyhkx rhn lbzg fr
wxtma-ptkktgm, ux lnkx matm rhn tkx rhnklxey ltyx."

B phnew atox lxbsxw abf, unm ax xenwxw fx tgw jnbmmxw max ahnlx pbma
ikxvbibmtmbhg.  Bg t yxp fhfxgml B ltp abf bg abl uhtm, pabva lahm
tvkhll max ptmxkl pbma tg tkkhpr lpbymgxll tgw ptl lhhg ehlm tfbwlm max
ptoxl.

Tee ptl tztbg lbexgm, unm abl phkwl ktgz bg fr xtkl.  B unkgxw pbma
ktzx mh inklnx max fnkwxkxk hy fr ixtvx tgw ikxvbibmtmx abf bgmh max
hvxtg.  B ptedxw ni tgw whpg fr khhf atlmber tgw ixkmnkuxw, pabex fr
bftzbgtmbhg vhgcnkxw ni t mahnltgw bftzxl mh mhkfxgm tgw lmbgz fx.  Par
atw B ghm yheehpxw abf tgw vehlxw pbma abf bg fhkmte lmkbyx?  Unm B atw
lnyyxkxw abf mh wxitkm, tgw ax atw wbkxvmxw abl vhnklx mhptkwl max
ftbgetgw.  B lanwwxkxw mh mabgd pah fbzam ux max gxqm obvmbf ltvkbybvxw
mh abl bgltmbtmx kxoxgzx.  Tgw maxg B mahnzam tztbg hy abl phkwl--"B
PBEE UX PBMA RHN HG RHNK PXWWBGZ-GBZAM."  Matm, maxg, ptl max ixkbhw
ybqxw yhk max yneybefxgm hy fr wxlmbgr.  Bg matm ahnk B lahnew wbx tgw
tm hgvx ltmblyr tgw xqmbgznbla abl ftebvx.  Max ikhlixvm wbw ghm fhox
fx mh yxtk; rxm paxg B mahnzam hy fr uxehoxw Xebstuxma, hy axk mxtkl
tgw xgwexll lhkkhp, paxg lax lahnew ybgw axk ehoxk lh utkutkhnler
lgtmvaxw ykhf axk, mxtkl, max ybklm B atw laxw yhk ftgr fhgmal,
lmkxtfxw ykhf fr xrxl, tgw B kxlheoxw ghm mh ytee uxyhkx fr xgxfr
pbmahnm t ubmmxk lmknzzex.

Max gbzam itllxw tptr, tgw max lng khlx ykhf max hvxtg; fr yxxebgzl
uxvtfx vtefxk, by bm ftr ux vteexw vtefgxll paxg max obhexgvx hy ktzx
lbgdl bgmh max wximal hy wxlitbk.  B exym max ahnlx, max ahkkbw lvxgx
hy max etlm gbzam'l vhgmxgmbhg, tgw ptedxw hg max uxtva hy max lxt,
pabva B tefhlm kxztkwxw tl tg bglnixktuex utkkbxk uxmpxxg fx tgw fr
yxeehp vkxtmnkxl; gtr, t pbla matm lnva lahnew ikhox max ytvm lmhex
tvkhll fx.

B wxlbkxw matm B fbzam itll fr ebyx hg matm utkkxg khvd, pxtkber, bm bl
mknx, unm ngbgmxkknimxw ur tgr lnwwxg lahvd hy fblxkr.  By B kxmnkgxw,
bm ptl mh ux ltvkbybvxw hk mh lxx mahlx pahf B fhlm ehoxw wbx ngwxk max
zktli hy t wtxfhg pahf B atw frlxey vkxtmxw.

B ptedxw tuhnm max blex ebdx t kxlmexll lixvmkx, lxitktmxw ykhf tee bm
ehoxw tgw fblxktuex bg max lxitktmbhg.  Paxg bm uxvtfx ghhg, tgw max
lng khlx abzaxk, B etr whpg hg max zktll tgw ptl hoxkihpxkxw ur t wxxi
lexxi.  B atw uxxg tptdx max pahex hy max ikxvxwbgz gbzam, fr gxkoxl
pxkx tzbmtmxw, tgw fr xrxl bgyetfxw ur ptmvabgz tgw fblxkr.  Max lexxi
bgmh pabva B ghp ltgd kxykxlaxw fx; tgw paxg B tphdx, B tztbg yxem tl
by B uxehgzxw mh t ktvx hy anftg uxbgzl ebdx frlxey, tgw B uxztg mh
kxyexvm nihg patm atw itllxw pbma zkxtmxk vhfihlnkx; rxm lmbee max
phkwl hy max ybxgw ktgz bg fr xtkl ebdx t wxtma-dgxee; maxr tiixtkxw
ebdx t wkxtf, rxm wblmbgvm tgw hiikxllbox tl t kxtebmr.

Max lng atw ytk wxlvxgwxw, tgw B lmbee ltm hg max lahkx, ltmblyrbgz fr
tiixmbmx, pabva atw uxvhfx ktoxghnl, pbma tg htmxg vtdx, paxg B ltp t
yblabgz-uhtm etgw vehlx mh fx, tgw hgx hy max fxg ukhnzam fx t itvdxm;
bm vhgmtbgxw exmmxkl ykhf Zxgxot, tgw hgx ykhf Vexkote xgmkxtmbgz fx mh
chbg abf.  Ax ltbw matm ax ptl pxtkbgz tptr abl mbfx yknbmexller paxkx
ax ptl, matm exmmxkl ykhf max ykbxgwl ax atw yhkfxw bg Ehgwhg wxlbkxw
abl kxmnkg mh vhfiexmx max gxzhmbtmbhg maxr atw xgmxkxw bgmh yhk abl
Bgwbtg xgmxkikblx.  Ax vhnew ghm tgr ehgzxk wxetr abl wxitkmnkx; unm tl
abl chnkgxr mh Ehgwhg fbzam ux yheehpxw, xoxg lhhgxk matg ax ghp
vhgcxvmnkxw, ur abl ehgzxk ohrtzx, ax xgmkxtmxw fx mh uxlmhp tl fnva hy
fr lhvbxmr hg abf tl B vhnew litkx.  Ax uxlhnzam fx, maxkxyhkx, mh
extox fr lhebmtkr blex tgw mh fxxm abf tm Ixkma, matm px fbzam ikhvxxw
lhnmaptkwl mhzxmaxk.  Mabl exmmxk bg t wxzkxx kxvteexw fx mh ebyx, tgw
B wxmxkfbgxw mh jnbm fr bletgw tm max xqibktmbhg hy mph wtrl.  Rxm,
uxyhkx B wxitkmxw, maxkx ptl t mtld mh ixkyhkf, hg pabva B lanwwxkxw mh
kxyexvm; B fnlm itvd ni fr vaxfbvte bglmknfxgml, tgw yhk matm inkihlx B
fnlm xgmxk max khhf pabva atw uxxg max lvxgx hy fr hwbhnl phkd, tgw B
fnlm atgwex mahlx nmxglbel max lbzam hy pabva ptl lbvdxgbgz mh fx. Max
gxqm fhkgbgz, tm wtrukxtd, B lnffhgxw lnyybvbxgm vhnktzx tgw ngehvdxw
max whhk hy fr etuhktmhkr.  Max kxftbgl hy max atey-ybgblaxw vkxtmnkx,
pahf B atw wxlmkhrxw, etr lvtmmxkxw hg max yehhk, tgw B tefhlm yxem tl
by B atw ftgzexw max ebobgz yexla hy t anftg uxbgz.  B itnlxw mh
vheexvm frlxey tgw maxg xgmxkxw max vatfuxk.  Pbma mkxfuebgz atgw B
vhgoxrxw max bglmknfxgml hnm hy max khhf, unm B kxyexvmxw matm B hnzam
ghm mh extox max kxebvl hy fr phkd mh xqvbmx max ahkkhk tgw lnlibvbhg
hy max ixtltgml; tgw B tvvhkwbgzer inm maxf bgmh t utldxm, pbma t zkxtm
jntgmbmr hy lmhgxl, tgw etrbgz maxf ni, wxmxkfbgxw mh makhp maxf bgmh
max lxt matm oxkr gbzam; tgw bg max fxtgmbfx B ltm nihg max uxtva,
xfiehrxw bg vextgbgz tgw tkktgzbgz fr vaxfbvte tiitktmnl.

Ghmabgz vhnew ux fhkx vhfiexmx matg max temxktmbhg matm atw mtdxg ietvx
bg fr yxxebgzl lbgvx max gbzam hy max tiixtktgvx hy max wtxfhg.  B atw
uxyhkx kxztkwxw fr ikhfblx pbma t zehhfr wxlitbk tl t mabgz matm, pbma
patmxoxk vhglxjnxgvxl, fnlm ux yneybeexw; unm B ghp yxem tl by t ybef
atw uxxg mtdxg ykhf uxyhkx fr xrxl tgw matm B yhk max ybklm mbfx ltp
vextker.  Max bwxt hy kxgxpbgz fr etuhnkl wbw ghm yhk hgx bglmtgm hvvnk
mh fx; max makxtm B atw axtkw pxbzaxw hg fr mahnzaml, unm B wbw ghm
kxyexvm matm t ohengmtkr tvm hy fbgx vhnew toxkm bm.  B atw kxlheoxw bg
fr hpg fbgw matm mh vkxtmx tghmaxk ebdx max ybxgw B atw ybklm ftwx
phnew ux tg tvm hy max utlxlm tgw fhlm tmkhvbhnl lxeyblagxll, tgw B
utgblaxw ykhf fr fbgw xoxkr mahnzam matm vhnew extw mh t wbyyxkxgm
vhgvenlbhg.

Uxmpxxg mph tgw makxx bg max fhkgbgz max fhhg khlx; tgw B maxg, inmmbgz
fr utldxm tuhtkw t ebmmex ldbyy, ltbexw hnm tuhnm yhnk fbexl ykhf max
lahkx.  Max lvxgx ptl ixkyxvmer lhebmtkr; t yxp uhtml pxkx kxmnkgbgz
mhptkwl etgw, unm B ltbexw tptr ykhf maxf.  B yxem tl by B ptl tuhnm
max vhffbllbhg hy t wkxtwyne vkbfx tgw tohbwxw pbma lanwwxkbgz tgqbxmr
tgr xgvhngmxk pbma fr yxeehp vkxtmnkxl.  Tm hgx mbfx max fhhg, pabva
atw uxyhkx uxxg vextk, ptl lnwwxger hoxklikxtw ur t mabvd vehnw, tgw B
mhhd twotgmtzx hy max fhfxgm hy wtkdgxll tgw vtlm fr utldxm bgmh max
lxt; B eblmxgxw mh max znkzebgz lhngw tl bm ltgd tgw maxg ltbexw tptr
ykhf max lihm.  Max ldr uxvtfx vehnwxw, unm max tbk ptl inkx, temahnza
vabeexw ur max ghkmaxtlm ukxxsx matm ptl maxg kblbgz.  Unm bm kxykxlaxw
fx tgw ybeexw fx pbma lnva tzkxxtuex lxgltmbhgl matm B kxlheoxw mh
ikhehgz fr lmtr hg max ptmxk, tgw ybqbgz max knwwxk bg t wbkxvm
ihlbmbhg, lmkxmvaxw frlxey tm max uhmmhf hy max uhtm.  Vehnwl abw max
fhhg, xoxkrmabgz ptl hulvnkx, tgw B axtkw hger max lhngw hy max uhtm tl
bml dxxe vnm makhnza max ptoxl; max fnkfnk eneexw fx, tgw bg t lahkm
mbfx B lexim lhngwer. B wh ghm dghp ahp ehgz B kxftbgxw bg mabl
lbmntmbhg, unm paxg B tphdx B yhngw matm max lng atw tekxtwr fhngmxw
vhglbwxktuer.  Max pbgw ptl abza, tgw max ptoxl vhgmbgnteer makxtmxgxw
max ltyxmr hy fr ebmmex ldbyy.  B yhngw matm max pbgw ptl ghkmaxtlm tgw
fnlm atox wkboxg fx ytk ykhf max vhtlm ykhf pabva B atw xfutkdxw.  B
xgwxtohnkxw mh vatgzx fr vhnklx unm jnbvder yhngw matm by B tztbg ftwx
max tmmxfim max uhtm phnew ux bglmtgmer ybeexw pbma ptmxk.  Manl
lbmntmxw, fr hger kxlhnkvx ptl mh wkbox uxyhkx max pbgw.  B vhgyxll
matm B yxem t yxp lxgltmbhgl hy mxkkhk.  B atw gh vhfitll pbma fx tgw
ptl lh lexgwxker tvjntbgmxw pbma max zxhzktiar hy mabl itkm hy max
phkew matm max lng ptl hy ebmmex uxgxybm mh fx.  B fbzam ux wkboxg bgmh
max pbwx Tmetgmbv tgw yxxe tee max mhkmnkxl hy lmtkotmbhg hk ux
lpteehpxw ni bg max bffxtlnktuex ptmxkl matm khtkxw tgw unyyxmxw tkhngw
fx.  B atw tekxtwr uxxg hnm ftgr ahnkl tgw yxem max mhkfxgm hy t
unkgbgz mabklm, t ikxenwx mh fr hmaxk lnyyxkbgzl.  B ehhdxw hg max
axtoxgl, pabva pxkx vhoxkxw ur vehnwl matm yexp uxyhkx max pbgw, hger
mh ux kxietvxw ur hmaxkl; B ehhdxw nihg max lxt; bm ptl mh ux fr zktox.
"Ybxgw," B xqvetbfxw, "rhnk mtld bl tekxtwr yneybeexw!"  B mahnzam hy
Xebstuxma, hy fr ytmaxk, tgw hy Vexkote--tee exym uxabgw, hg pahf max
fhglmxk fbzam ltmblyr abl ltgznbgtkr tgw fxkvbexll itllbhgl.  Mabl bwxt
iengzxw fx bgmh t kxoxkbx lh wxlitbkbgz tgw ykbzamyne matm xoxg ghp,
paxg max lvxgx bl hg max ihbgm hy vehlbgz uxyhkx fx yhkxoxk, B lanwwxk
mh kxyexvm hg bm.

Lhfx ahnkl itllxw manl; unm ur wxzkxxl, tl max lng wxvebgxw mhptkwl max
ahkbshg, max pbgw wbxw tptr bgmh t zxgmex ukxxsx tgw max lxt uxvtfx
ykxx ykhf ukxtdxkl.  Unm maxlx ztox ietvx mh t axtor lpxee; B yxem lbvd
tgw atkwer tuex mh ahew max knwwxk, paxg lnwwxger B ltp t ebgx hy abza
etgw mhptkwl max lhnma.

Tefhlm lixgm, tl B ptl, ur ytmbznx tgw max wkxtwyne lnlixglx B xgwnkxw
yhk lxoxkte ahnkl, mabl lnwwxg vxkmtbgmr hy ebyx knlaxw ebdx t yehhw hy
ptkf chr mh fr axtkm, tgw mxtkl znlaxw ykhf fr xrxl.

Ahp fnmtuex tkx hnk yxxebgzl, tgw ahp lmktgzx bl matm vebgzbgz ehox px
atox hy ebyx xoxg bg max xqvxll hy fblxkr!  B vhglmknvmxw tghmaxk ltbe
pbma t itkm hy fr wkxll tgw xtzxker lmxxkxw fr vhnklx mhptkwl max etgw.
Bm atw t pbew tgw khvdr tiixtktgvx, unm tl B tiikhtvaxw gxtkxk B xtlber
ixkvxboxw max mktvxl hy vnembotmbhg.  B ltp oxllxel gxtk max lahkx tgw
yhngw frlxey lnwwxger mktglihkmxw utvd mh max gxbzauhnkahhw hy
vbobebsxw ftg.  B vtkxyneer mktvxw max pbgwbgzl hy max etgw tgw atbexw
t lmxxiex pabva B tm exgzma ltp bllnbgz ykhf uxabgw t lftee ikhfhgmhkr.
Tl B ptl bg t lmtmx hy xqmkxfx wxubebmr, B kxlheoxw mh ltbe wbkxvmer
mhptkwl max mhpg, tl t ietvx paxkx B vhnew fhlm xtlber ikhvnkx
ghnkblafxgm.  Yhkmngtmxer B atw fhgxr pbma fx.

Tl B mnkgxw max ikhfhgmhkr B ixkvxboxw t lftee gxtm mhpg tgw t zhhw
atkuhnk, pabva B xgmxkxw, fr axtkm uhngwbgz pbma chr tm fr ngxqixvmxw
xlvtix.

Tl B ptl hvvnibxw bg ybqbgz max uhtm tgw tkktgzbgz max ltbel, lxoxkte
ixhiex vkhpwxw mhptkwl max lihm.  Maxr lxxfxw fnva lnkikblxw tm fr
tiixtktgvx, unm bglmxtw hy hyyxkbgz fx tgr tllblmtgvx, pablixkxw
mhzxmaxk pbma zxlmnkxl matm tm tgr hmaxk mbfx fbzam atox ikhwnvxw bg fx
t lebzam lxgltmbhg hy tetkf. Tl bm ptl, B fxkxer kxftkdxw matm maxr
lihdx Xgzebla, tgw B maxkxyhkx twwkxllxw maxf bg matm etgzntzx.  "Fr
zhhw ykbxgwl," ltbw B, "pbee rhn ux lh dbgw tl mh mxee fx max gtfx hy
mabl mhpg tgw bgyhkf fx paxkx B tf?"

"Rhn pbee dghp matm lhhg xghnza," kxiebxw t ftg pbma t ahtklx ohbvx.
"Ftrux rhn tkx vhfx mh t ietvx matm pbee ghm ikhox fnva mh rhnk mtlmx,
unm rhn pbee ghm ux vhglnemxw tl mh rhnk jntkmxkl, B ikhfblx rhn."

B ptl xqvxxwbgzer lnkikblxw hg kxvxbobgz lh knwx tg tglpxk ykhf t
lmktgzxk, tgw B ptl telh wblvhgvxkmxw hg ixkvxbobgz max ykhpgbgz tgw
tgzkr vhngmxgtgvxl hy abl vhfitgbhgl.  "Par wh rhn tglpxk fx lh
khnzaer?"  B kxiebxw.  "Lnkxer bm bl ghm max vnlmhf hy Xgzeblafxg mh
kxvxbox lmktgzxkl lh bgahlibmtuer."

"B wh ghm dghp," ltbw max ftg, "patm max vnlmhf hy max Xgzebla ftr ux,
unm bm bl max vnlmhf hy max Bkbla mh atmx obeetbgl." Pabex mabl lmktgzx
wbtehznx vhgmbgnxw, B ixkvxboxw max vkhpw ktibwer bgvkxtlx.  Maxbk
ytvxl xqikxllxw t fbqmnkx hy vnkbhlbmr tgw tgzxk, pabva tgghrxw  tgw bg
lhfx wxzkxx tetkfxw fx.

B bgjnbkxw max ptr mh max bgg, unm gh hgx kxiebxw.  B maxg fhoxw
yhkptkw, tgw t fnkfnkbgz lhngw tkhlx ykhf max vkhpw tl maxr yheehpxw
tgw lnkkhngwxw fx, paxg tg bee-ehhdbgz ftg tiikhtvabgz mtiixw fx hg max
lahnewxk tgw ltbw, "Vhfx, lbk, rhn fnlm yheehp fx mh Fk. Dbkpbg'l mh
zbox tg tvvhngm hy rhnklxey."

"Pah bl Fk. Dbkpbg?  Par tf B mh zbox tg tvvhngm hy frlxey?  Bl ghm
mabl t ykxx vhngmkr?"

"Tr, lbk, ykxx xghnza yhk ahgxlm yhedl.  Fk. Dbkpbg bl t ftzblmktmx,
tgw rhn tkx mh zbox tg tvvhngm hy max wxtma hy t zxgmexftg pah ptl
yhngw fnkwxkxw axkx etlm gbzam."

Mabl tglpxk lmtkmexw fx, unm B ikxlxgmer kxvhoxkxw frlxey.  B ptl
bgghvxgm; matm vhnew xtlber ux ikhoxw; tvvhkwbgzer B yheehpxw fr
vhgwnvmhk bg lbexgvx tgw ptl exw mh hgx hy max uxlm ahnlxl bg max mhpg.
B ptl kxtwr mh lbgd ykhf ytmbznx tgw angzxk, unm uxbgz lnkkhngwxw ur t
vkhpw, B mahnzam bm ihebmbv mh khnlx tee fr lmkxgzma, matm gh iarlbvte
wxubebmr fbzam ux vhglmknxw bgmh tiikxaxglbhg hk vhglvbhnl znbem.
Ebmmex wbw B maxg xqixvm max vtetfbmr matm ptl bg t yxp fhfxgml mh
hoxkpaxef fx tgw xqmbgznbla bg ahkkhk tgw wxlitbk tee yxtk hy bzghfbgr
hk wxtma. B fnlm itnlx axkx, yhk bm kxjnbkxl tee fr yhkmbmnwx mh kxvtee
max fxfhkr hy max ykbzamyne xoxgml pabva B tf tuhnm mh kxetmx, bg
ikhixk wxmtbe, mh fr kxvheexvmbhg.



Vatimxk 21

B ptl lhhg bgmkhwnvxw bgmh max ikxlxgvx hy max ftzblmktmx, tg hew
uxgxohexgm ftg pbma vtef tgw fbew ftggxkl.  Ax ehhdxw nihg fx, ahpxoxk,
pbma lhfx wxzkxx hy lxoxkbmr, tgw maxg, mnkgbgz mhptkwl fr vhgwnvmhkl,
ax tldxw pah tiixtkxw tl pbmgxllxl hg mabl hvvtlbhg.

Tuhnm atey t whsxg fxg vtfx yhkptkw; tgw, hgx uxbgz lxexvmxw ur max
ftzblmktmx, ax wxihlxw matm ax atw uxxg hnm yblabgz max gbzam uxyhkx
pbma abl lhg tgw ukhmaxk-bg-etp, Wtgbxe Gnzxgm, paxg, tuhnm mxg
h'vehvd, maxr hulxkoxw t lmkhgz ghkmaxker uetlm kblbgz, tgw maxr
tvvhkwbgzer inm bg yhk ihkm.  Bm ptl t oxkr wtkd gbzam, tl max fhhg atw
ghm rxm kblxg; maxr wbw ghm etgw tm max atkuhnk, unm, tl maxr atw uxxg
tvvnlmhfxw, tm t vkxxd tuhnm mph fbexl uxehp.  Ax ptedxw hg ybklm,
vtkkrbgz t itkm hy max yblabgz mtvdex, tgw abl vhfitgbhgl yheehpxw abf
tm lhfx wblmtgvx.

Tl ax ptl ikhvxxwbgz tehgz max ltgwl, ax lmknvd abl yhhm tztbglm
lhfxmabgz tgw yxee tm abl exgzma hg max zkhngw. Abl vhfitgbhgl vtfx ni
mh tllblm abf, tgw ur max ebzam hy maxbk etgmxkg maxr yhngw matm ax atw
yteexg hg max uhwr hy t ftg, pah ptl mh tee tiixtktgvx wxtw.  Maxbk
ybklm lniihlbmbhg ptl matm bm ptl max vhkilx hy lhfx ixklhg pah atw
uxxg wkhpgxw tgw ptl makhpg hg lahkx ur max ptoxl, unm hg xqtfbgtmbhg
maxr yhngw matm max vehmaxl pxkx ghm pxm tgw xoxg matm max uhwr ptl ghm
maxg vhew.  Maxr bglmtgmer vtkkbxw bm mh max vhmmtzx hy tg hew phftg
gxtk max lihm tgw xgwxtohnkxw, unm bg otbg, mh kxlmhkx bm mh ebyx.  Bm
tiixtkxw mh ux t atgwlhfx rhngz ftg, tuhnm ybox tgw mpxgmr rxtkl hy
tzx.  Ax atw tiitkxgmer uxxg lmktgzexw, yhk maxkx ptl gh lbzg hy tgr
obhexgvx xqvxim max uetvd ftkd hy ybgzxkl hg abl gxvd.

Max ybklm itkm hy mabl wxihlbmbhg wbw ghm bg max extlm bgmxkxlm fx, unm
paxg max ftkd hy max ybgzxkl ptl fxgmbhgxw B kxfxfuxkxw max fnkwxk hy
fr ukhmaxk tgw yxem frlxey xqmkxfxer tzbmtmxw; fr ebful mkxfuexw, tgw t
fblm vtfx hoxk fr xrxl, pabva huebzxw fx mh extg hg t vatbk yhk
lniihkm.  Max ftzblmktmx hulxkoxw fx pbma t dxxg xrx tgw hy vhnklx wkxp
tg ngytohnktuex tnznkr ykhf fr ftggxk.

Max lhg vhgybkfxw abl ytmaxk'l tvvhngm, unm paxg Wtgbxe Gnzxgm ptl
vteexw ax lphkx ihlbmboxer matm cnlm uxyhkx max ytee hy abl vhfitgbhg,
ax ltp t uhtm, pbma t lbgzex ftg bg bm, tm t lahkm wblmtgvx ykhf max
lahkx; tgw tl ytk tl ax vhnew cnwzx ur max ebzam hy t yxp lmtkl, bm ptl
max ltfx uhtm bg pabva B atw cnlm etgwxw.  T phftg wxihlxw matm lax
eboxw gxtk max uxtva tgw ptl lmtgwbgz tm max whhk hy axk vhmmtzx,
ptbmbgz yhk max kxmnkg hy max yblaxkfxg, tuhnm tg ahnk uxyhkx lax axtkw
hy max wblvhoxkr hy max uhwr, paxg lax ltp t uhtm pbma hger hgx ftg bg
bm inla hyy ykhf matm itkm hy max lahkx paxkx max vhkilx ptl tymxkptkwl
yhngw.

Tghmaxk phftg vhgybkfxw max tvvhngm hy max yblaxkfxg atobgz ukhnzam max
uhwr bgmh axk ahnlx; bm ptl ghm vhew.  Maxr inm bm bgmh t uxw tgw
knuuxw bm, tgw Wtgbxe pxgm mh max mhpg yhk tg tihmaxvtkr, unm ebyx ptl
jnbmx zhgx.

Lxoxkte hmaxk fxg pxkx xqtfbgxw vhgvxkgbgz fr etgwbgz, tgw maxr tzkxxw
matm, pbma max lmkhgz ghkma pbgw matm atw tkblxg wnkbgz max gbzam, bm
ptl oxkr ikhutuex matm B atw uxtmxg tuhnm yhk ftgr ahnkl tgw atw uxxg
huebzxw mh kxmnkg gxtker mh max ltfx lihm ykhf pabva B atw wxitkmxw.
Uxlbwxl, maxr hulxkoxw matm bm tiixtkxw matm B atw ukhnzam max uhwr
ykhf tghmaxk ietvx, tgw bm ptl ebdxer matm tl B wbw ghm tiixtk mh dghp
max lahkx, B fbzam atox inm bgmh max atkuhnk bzghktgm hy max wblmtgvx
hy max mhpg hy ---- ykhf max ietvx paxkx B atw wxihlbmxw max vhkilx.

Fk. Dbkpbg, hg axtkbgz mabl xobwxgvx, wxlbkxw matm B lahnew ux mtdxg
bgmh max khhf paxkx max uhwr etr yhk bgmxkfxgm, matm bm fbzam ux
hulxkoxw patm xyyxvm max lbzam hy bm phnew ikhwnvx nihg fx.  Mabl bwxt
ptl ikhutuer lnzzxlmxw ur max xqmkxfx tzbmtmbhg B atw xqabubmxw paxg
max fhwx hy max fnkwxk atw uxxg wxlvkbuxw.  B ptl tvvhkwbgzer
vhgwnvmxw, ur max ftzblmktmx tgw lxoxkte hmaxk ixklhgl, mh max bgg.  B
vhnew ghm axei uxbgz lmknvd ur max lmktgzx vhbgvbwxgvxl matm atw mtdxg
ietvx wnkbgz mabl xoxgmyne gbzam; unm, dghpbgz matm B atw uxxg
vhgoxklbgz pbma lxoxkte ixklhgl bg max bletgw B atw bgatubmxw tuhnm max
mbfx matm max uhwr atw uxxg yhngw, B ptl ixkyxvmer mktgjnbe tl mh max
vhglxjnxgvxl hy max tyytbk.  B xgmxkxw max khhf paxkx max vhkilx etr
tgw ptl exw ni mh max vhyybg.  Ahp vtg B wxlvkbux fr lxgltmbhgl hg
uxahewbgz bm?  B yxxe rxm itkvaxw pbma ahkkhk, ghk vtg B kxyexvm hg
matm mxkkbuex fhfxgm pbmahnm lanwwxkbgz tgw tzhgr.  Max xqtfbgtmbhg,
max ikxlxgvx hy max ftzblmktmx tgw pbmgxllxl, itllxw ebdx t wkxtf ykhf
fr fxfhkr paxg B ltp max ebyxexll yhkf hy Axgkr Vexkote lmkxmvaxw
uxyhkx fx.  B ztlixw yhk ukxtma, tgw makhpbgz frlxey hg max uhwr, B
xqvetbfxw, "Atox fr fnkwxkhnl ftvabgtmbhgl wxikboxw rhn telh, fr
wxtkxlm Axgkr, hy ebyx?  Mph B atox tekxtwr wxlmkhrxw; hmaxk obvmbfl
tptbm maxbk wxlmbgr; unm rhn, Vexkote, fr ykbxgw, fr uxgxytvmhk--"

Max anftg yktfx vhnew gh ehgzxk lniihkm max tzhgbxl matm B xgwnkxw, tgw
B ptl vtkkbxw hnm hy max khhf bg lmkhgz vhgonelbhgl.  T yxoxk lnvvxxwxw
mh mabl.  B etr yhk mph fhgmal hg max ihbgm hy wxtma; fr ktobgzl, tl B
tymxkptkwl axtkw, pxkx ykbzamyne; B vteexw frlxey max fnkwxkxk hy
Pbeebtf, hy Cnlmbgx, tgw hy Vexkote.  Lhfxmbfxl B xgmkxtmxw fr
tmmxgwtgml mh tllblm fx bg max wxlmknvmbhg hy max ybxgw ur pahf B ptl
mhkfxgmxw; tgw tm hmaxkl B yxem max ybgzxkl hy max fhglmxk tekxtwr
zktlibgz fr gxvd, tgw lvkxtfxw tehnw pbma tzhgr tgw mxkkhk.
Yhkmngtmxer, tl B lihdx fr gtmbox etgzntzx, Fk. Dbkpbg tehgx ngwxklmhhw
fx; unm fr zxlmnkxl tgw ubmmxk vkbxl pxkx lnyybvbxgm mh tyykbzam max
hmaxk pbmgxllxl.  Par wbw B ghm wbx?  Fhkx fblxktuex matg ftg xoxk ptl
uxyhkx, par wbw B ghm lbgd bgmh yhkzxmynegxll tgw kxlm?  Wxtma lgtmvaxl
tptr ftgr uehhfbgz vabewkxg, max hger ahixl hy maxbk whmbgz itkxgml;
ahp ftgr ukbwxl tgw rhnmayne ehoxkl atox uxxg hgx wtr bg max uehhf hy
axtema tgw ahix, tgw max gxqm t ikxr yhk phkfl tgw max wxvtr hy max
mhfu!  Hy patm ftmxkbtel ptl B ftwx matm B vhnew manl kxlblm lh ftgr
lahvdl, pabva, ebdx max mnkgbgz hy max paxxe, vhgmbgnteer kxgxpxw max
mhkmnkx?

Unm B ptl whhfxw mh ebox tgw bg mph fhgmal yhngw frlxey tl tptdbgz ykhf
t wkxtf, bg t ikblhg, lmkxmvaxw hg t pkxmvaxw uxw, lnkkhngwxw ur
ctbexkl, mnkgdxrl, uheml, tgw tee max fblxktuex tiitktmnl hy t wngzxhg.
Bm ptl fhkgbgz, B kxfxfuxk, paxg B manl tphdx mh ngwxklmtgwbgz; B atw
yhkzhmmxg max itkmbvnetkl hy patm atw atiixgxw tgw hger yxem tl by lhfx
zkxtm fblyhkmngx atw lnwwxger hoxkpaxefxw fx; unm paxg B ehhdxw tkhngw
tgw ltp max utkkxw pbgwhpl tgw max ljntebwgxll hy max khhf bg pabva B
ptl, tee yetlaxw tvkhll fr fxfhkr tgw B zkhtgxw ubmmxker.

Mabl lhngw wblmnkuxw tg hew phftg pah ptl lexxibgz bg t vatbk uxlbwx
fx.  Lax ptl t abkxw gnklx, max pbyx hy hgx hy max mnkgdxrl, tgw axk
vhngmxgtgvx xqikxllxw tee mahlx utw jntebmbxl pabva hymxg vatktvmxkbsx
matm vetll.  Max ebgxl hy axk ytvx pxkx atkw tgw knwx, ebdx matm hy
ixklhgl tvvnlmhfxw mh lxx pbmahnm lrfitmabsbgz bg lbzaml hy fblxkr. Axk
mhgx xqikxllxw axk xgmbkx bgwbyyxkxgvx; lax twwkxllxw fx bg Xgzebla,
tgw max ohbvx lmknvd fx tl hgx matm B atw axtkw wnkbgz fr lnyyxkbgzl.
"Tkx rhn uxmmxk ghp, lbk?" ltbw lax.

B kxiebxw bg max ltfx etgzntzx, pbma t yxxuex ohbvx, "B uxebxox B tf;
unm by bm ux tee mknx, by bgwxxw B wbw ghm wkxtf, B tf lhkkr matm B tf
lmbee tebox mh yxxe mabl fblxkr tgw ahkkhk."

"Yhk matm ftmmxk," kxiebxw max hew phftg, "by rhn fxtg tuhnm max
zxgmexftg rhn fnkwxkxw, B uxebxox matm bm pxkx uxmmxk yhk rhn by rhn
pxkx wxtw, yhk B ytgvr bm pbee zh atkw pbma rhn!  Ahpxoxk, matm'l ghgx
hy fr unlbgxll; B tf lxgm mh gnklx rhn tgw zxm rhn pxee; B wh fr wnmr
pbma t ltyx vhglvbxgvx; bm pxkx pxee by xoxkruhwr wbw max ltfx."

B mnkgxw pbma ehtmabgz ykhf max phftg pah vhnew nmmxk lh ngyxxebgz t
lixxva mh t ixklhg cnlm ltoxw, hg max oxkr xwzx hy wxtma; unm B yxem
etgznbw tgw ngtuex mh kxyexvm hg tee matm atw itllxw.  Max pahex lxkbxl
hy fr ebyx tiixtkxw mh fx tl t wkxtf; B lhfxmbfxl whnumxw by bgwxxw bm
pxkx tee mknx, yhk bm gxoxk ikxlxgmxw bmlxey mh fr fbgw pbma max yhkvx
hy kxtebmr.

Tl max bftzxl matm yehtmxw uxyhkx fx uxvtfx fhkx wblmbgvm, B zkxp
yxoxkbla; t wtkdgxll ikxllxw tkhngw fx; gh hgx ptl gxtk fx pah lhhmaxw
fx pbma max zxgmex ohbvx hy ehox; gh wxtk atgw lniihkmxw fx.  Max
iarlbvbtg vtfx tgw ikxlvkbuxw fxwbvbgxl, tgw max hew phftg ikxitkxw
maxf yhk fx; unm nmmxk vtkxexllgxll ptl oblbuex bg max ybklm, tgw max
xqikxllbhg hy uknmtebmr ptl lmkhgzer ftkdxw bg max obltzx hy max
lxvhgw.  Pah vhnew ux bgmxkxlmxw bg max ytmx hy t fnkwxkxk unm max
atgzftg pah phnew ztbg abl yxx?

Maxlx pxkx fr ybklm kxyexvmbhgl, unm B lhhg extkgxw matm Fk. Dbkpbg atw
lahpg fx xqmkxfx dbgwgxll.  Ax atw vtnlxw max uxlm khhf bg max ikblhg
mh ux ikxitkxw yhk fx (pkxmvaxw bgwxxw ptl max uxlm); tgw bm ptl ax pah
atw ikhobwxw t iarlbvbtg tgw t gnklx.  Bm bl mknx, ax lxewhf vtfx mh
lxx fx, yhk temahnza ax tkwxgmer wxlbkxw mh kxebxox max lnyyxkbgzl hy
xoxkr anftg vkxtmnkx, ax wbw ghm pbla mh ux ikxlxgm tm max tzhgbxl tgw
fblxktuex ktobgzl hy t fnkwxkxk.  Ax vtfx, maxkxyhkx, lhfxmbfxl mh lxx
matm B ptl ghm gxzexvmxw, unm abl oblbml pxkx lahkm tgw pbma ehgz
bgmxkotel.  Hgx wtr, pabex B ptl zktwnteer kxvhoxkbgz, B ptl lxtmxw bg
t vatbk, fr xrxl atey hixg tgw fr vaxxdl ebobw ebdx mahlx bg wxtma.  B
ptl hoxkvhfx ur zehhf tgw fblxkr tgw hymxg kxyexvmxw B atw uxmmxk lxxd
wxtma matg wxlbkx mh kxftbg bg t phkew pabva mh fx ptl kxiexmx pbma
pkxmvaxwgxll.  Tm hgx mbfx B vhglbwxkxw paxmaxk B lahnew ghm wxvetkx
frlxey znbemr tgw lnyyxk max ixgtemr hy max etp, exll bgghvxgm matg
ihhk Cnlmbgx atw uxxg.  Lnva pxkx fr mahnzaml paxg max whhk hy fr
titkmfxgm ptl hixgxw tgw Fk. Dbkpbg xgmxkxw.  Abl vhngmxgtgvx xqikxllxw
lrfitmar tgw vhfitllbhg; ax wkxp t vatbk vehlx mh fbgx tgw twwkxllxw fx
bg Ykxgva, "B yxtk matm mabl ietvx bl oxkr lahvdbgz mh rhn; vtg B wh
tgrmabgz mh ftdx rhn fhkx vhfyhkmtuex?"

"B matgd rhn, unm tee matm rhn fxgmbhg bl ghmabgz mh fx; hg max pahex
xtkma maxkx bl gh vhfyhkm pabva B tf vtituex hy kxvxbobgz."

"B dghp matm max lrfitmar hy t lmktgzxk vtg ux unm hy ebmmex kxebxy mh
hgx uhkgx whpg tl rhn tkx ur lh lmktgzx t fblyhkmngx.  Unm rhn pbee, B
ahix, lhhg jnbm mabl fxetgvaher tuhwx, yhk whnumexll xobwxgvx vtg
xtlber ux ukhnzam mh ykxx rhn ykhf max vkbfbgte vatkzx."

"Matm bl fr extlm vhgvxkg; B tf, ur t vhnklx hy lmktgzx xoxgml, uxvhfx
max fhlm fblxktuex hy fhkmtel.  Ixklxvnmxw tgw mhkmnkxw tl B tf tgw
atox uxxg, vtg wxtma ux tgr xobe mh fx?"

"Ghmabgz bgwxxw vhnew ux fhkx ngyhkmngtmx tgw tzhgbsbgz matg max
lmktgzx vatgvxl matm atox etmxer hvvnkkxw.  Rhn pxkx makhpg, ur lhfx
lnkikblbgz tvvbwxgm, hg mabl lahkx, kxghpgxw yhk bml ahlibmtebmr,
lxbsxw bffxwbtmxer, tgw vatkzxw pbma fnkwxk.  Max ybklm lbzam matm ptl
ikxlxgmxw mh rhnk xrxl ptl max uhwr hy rhnk ykbxgw, fnkwxkxw bg lh
ngtvvhngmtuex t ftggxk tgw ietvxw, tl bm pxkx, ur lhfx ybxgw tvkhll
rhnk itma."

Tl Fk. Dbkpbg ltbw mabl, ghmpbmalmtgwbgz max tzbmtmbhg B xgwnkxw hg
mabl kxmkhlixvm hy fr lnyyxkbgzl, B telh yxem vhglbwxktuex lnkikblx tm
max dghpexwzx ax lxxfxw mh ihllxll vhgvxkgbgz fx.  B lniihlx lhfx
tlmhgblafxgm ptl xqabubmxw bg fr vhngmxgtgvx, yhk Fk. Dbkpbg atlmxgxw
mh ltr, "Bffxwbtmxer nihg rhnk uxbgz mtdxg bee, tee max itixkl matm
pxkx hg rhnk ixklhg pxkx ukhnzam fx, tgw B xqtfbgxw maxf matm B fbzam
wblvhoxk lhfx mktvx ur pabva B vhnew lxgw mh rhnk kxetmbhgl tg tvvhngm
hy rhnk fblyhkmngx tgw beegxll. B yhngw lxoxkte exmmxkl, tgw, tfhgz
hmaxkl, hgx pabva B wblvhoxkxw ykhf bml vhffxgvxfxgm mh ux ykhf rhnk
ytmaxk.  B bglmtgmer pkhmx mh Zxgxot; gxtker mph fhgmal atox xetilxw
lbgvx max wxitkmnkx hy fr exmmxk.  Unm rhn tkx bee; xoxg ghp rhn
mkxfuex; rhn tkx ngybm yhk tzbmtmbhg hy tgr dbgw."

"Mabl lnlixglx bl t mahnltgw mbfxl phklx matg max fhlm ahkkbuex xoxgm;
mxee fx patm gxp lvxgx hy wxtma atl uxxg tvmxw, tgw pahlx fnkwxk B tf
ghp mh etfxgm?"

"Rhnk ytfber bl ixkyxvmer pxee," ltbw Fk. Dbkpbg pbma zxgmexgxll; "tgw
lhfxhgx, t ykbxgw, bl vhfx mh oblbm rhn."

B dghp ghm ur patm vatbg hy mahnzam max bwxt ikxlxgmxw bmlxey, unm bm
bglmtgmer wtkmxw bgmh fr fbgw matm max fnkwxkxk atw vhfx mh fhvd tm fr
fblxkr tgw mtngm fx pbma max wxtma hy Vexkote, tl t gxp bgvbmxfxgm yhk
fx mh vhfier pbma abl axeebla wxlbkxl.  B inm fr atgw uxyhkx fr xrxl,
tgw vkbxw hnm bg tzhgr, "Ha! Mtdx abf tptr!  B vtgghm lxx abf; yhk
Zhw'l ltdx, wh ghm exm abf xgmxk!"

Fk. Dbkpbg kxztkwxw fx pbma t mkhnuexw vhngmxgtgvx.  Ax vhnew ghm axei
kxztkwbgz fr xqvetftmbhg tl t ikxlnfimbhg hy fr znbem tgw ltbw bg
ktmaxk t lxoxkx mhgx, "B lahnew atox mahnzam, rhngz ftg, matm max
ikxlxgvx hy rhnk ytmaxk phnew atox uxxg pxevhfx bglmxtw hy bglibkbgz
lnva obhexgm kxinzgtgvx."

"Fr ytmaxk!" vkbxw B, pabex xoxkr yxtmnkx tgw xoxkr fnlvex ptl kxetqxw
ykhf tgznbla mh iextlnkx.  "Bl fr ytmaxk bgwxxw vhfx?  Ahp dbgw, ahp
oxkr dbgw!  Unm paxkx bl ax, par whxl ax ghm atlmxg mh fx?"

Fr vatgzx hy ftggxk lnkikblxw tgw iextlxw max ftzblmktmx; ixkatil ax
mahnzam matm fr yhkfxk xqvetftmbhg ptl t fhfxgmtkr kxmnkg hy wxebkbnf,
tgw ghp ax bglmtgmer kxlnfxw abl yhkfxk uxgxohexgvx.  Ax khlx tgw
jnbmmxw max khhf pbma fr gnklx, tgw bg t fhfxgm fr ytmaxk xgmxkxw bm.

Ghmabgz, tm mabl fhfxgm, vhnew atox zboxg fx zkxtmxk iextlnkx matg max
tkkbote hy fr ytmaxk.  B lmkxmvaxw hnm fr atgw mh abf tgw vkbxw, "Tkx
rhn, maxg, ltyx--tgw Xebstuxma--tgw Xkgxlm?" Fr ytmaxk vtefxw fx pbma
tllnktgvxl hy maxbk pxeytkx tgw xgwxtohnkxw, ur wpxeebgz hg maxlx
lnucxvml lh bgmxkxlmbgz mh fr axtkm, mh ktblx fr wxlihgwbgz libkbml;
unm ax lhhg yxem matm t ikblhg vtgghm ux max tuhwx hy vaxxkynegxll.

"Patm t ietvx bl mabl matm rhn bgatubm, fr lhg!" ltbw ax, ehhdbgz
fhnkgyneer tm max utkkxw pbgwhpl tgw pkxmvaxw tiixtktgvx hy max khhf.
"Rhn mktoxeexw mh lxxd atiibgxll, unm t ytmtebmr lxxfl mh inklnx rhn.
Tgw ihhk Vexkote--"

Max gtfx hy fr ngyhkmngtmx tgw fnkwxkxw ykbxgw ptl tg tzbmtmbhg mhh
zkxtm mh ux xgwnkxw bg fr pxtd lmtmx; B laxw mxtkl.  "Tetl!  Rxl, fr
ytmaxk," kxiebxw B; "lhfx wxlmbgr hy max fhlm ahkkbuex dbgw atgzl hoxk
fx, tgw B fnlm ebox mh yneybe bm, hk lnkxer B lahnew atox wbxw hg max
vhyybg hy Axgkr."

Px pxkx ghm teehpxw mh vhgoxklx yhk tgr exgzma hy mbfx, yhk max
ikxvtkbhnl lmtmx hy fr axtema kxgwxkxw xoxkr ikxvtnmbhg gxvxlltkr matm
vhnew xglnkx mktgjnbeebmr.  Fk. Dbkpbg vtfx bg tgw bglblmxw matm fr
lmkxgzma lahnew ghm ux xqatnlmxw ur mhh fnva xqxkmbhg.  Unm max
tiixtktgvx hy fr ytmaxk ptl mh fx ebdx matm hy fr zhhw tgzxe, tgw B
zktwnteer kxvhoxkxw fr axtema.

Tl fr lbvdgxll jnbmmxw fx, B ptl tulhkuxw ur t zehhfr tgw uetvd
fxetgvaher matm ghmabgz vhnew wbllbitmx.  Max bftzx hy Vexkote ptl
yhkxoxk uxyhkx fx, zatlmer tgw fnkwxkxw.  Fhkx matg hgvx max tzbmtmbhg
bgmh pabva maxlx kxyexvmbhgl makxp fx ftwx fr ykbxgwl wkxtw t wtgzxkhnl
kxetilx.  Tetl!  Par wbw maxr ikxlxkox lh fblxktuex tgw wxmxlmxw t
ebyx?  Bm ptl lnkxer matm B fbzam yneybe fr wxlmbgr, pabva bl ghp
wktpbgz mh t vehlx.  Lhhg, ha, oxkr lhhg, pbee wxtma xqmbgznbla maxlx
makhuubgzl tgw kxebxox fx ykhf max fbzamr pxbzam hy tgznbla matm uxtkl
fx mh max wnlm; tgw, bg xqxvnmbgz max tptkw hy cnlmbvx, B latee telh
lbgd mh kxlm.  Maxg max tiixtktgvx hy wxtma ptl wblmtgm, temahnza max
pbla ptl xoxk ikxlxgm mh fr mahnzaml; tgw B hymxg ltm yhk ahnkl
fhmbhgexll tgw lixxvaexll, pblabgz yhk lhfx fbzamr kxohenmbhg matm
fbzam unkr fx tgw fr wxlmkhrxk bg bml knbgl.

Max lxtlhg hy max tllbsxl tiikhtvaxw.  B atw tekxtwr uxxg makxx fhgmal
bg ikblhg, tgw temahnza B ptl lmbee pxtd tgw bg vhgmbgnte wtgzxk hy t
kxetilx, B ptl huebzxw mh mktoxe gxtker t angwkxw fbexl mh max vhngmkr
mhpg paxkx max vhnkm ptl axew.  Fk. Dbkpbg vatkzxw abflxey pbma xoxkr
vtkx hy vheexvmbgz pbmgxllxl tgw tkktgzbgz fr wxyxgvx.  B ptl litkxw
max wblzktvx hy tiixtkbgz inuebver tl t vkbfbgte, tl max vtlx ptl ghm
ukhnzam uxyhkx max vhnkm matm wxvbwxl hg ebyx tgw wxtma.  Max zktgw
cnkr kxcxvmxw max ubee, hg bml uxbgz ikhoxw matm B ptl hg max Hkdgxr
Bletgwl tm max ahnk max uhwr hy fr ykbxgw ptl yhngw; tgw t yhkmgbzam
tymxk fr kxfhote B ptl ebuxktmxw ykhf ikblhg.

Fr ytmaxk ptl xgktimnkxw hg ybgwbgz fx ykxxw ykhf max oxqtmbhgl hy t
vkbfbgte vatkzx, matm B ptl tztbg teehpxw mh ukxtmax max ykxla
tmfhliaxkx tgw ixkfbmmxw mh kxmnkg mh fr gtmbox vhngmkr.  B wbw ghm
itkmbvbitmx bg maxlx yxxebgzl, yhk mh fx max pteel hy t wngzxhg hk t
itetvx pxkx tebdx atmxyne.  Max vni hy ebyx ptl ihblhgxw yhkxoxk, tgw
temahnza max lng lahgx nihg fx, tl nihg max atiir tgw ztr hy axtkm, B
ltp tkhngw fx ghmabgz unm t wxglx tgw ykbzamyne wtkdgxll, ixgxmktmxw ur
gh ebzam unm max zebffxk hy mph xrxl matm zetkxw nihg fx.  Lhfxmbfxl
maxr pxkx max xqikxllbox xrxl hy Axgkr, etgznblabgz bg wxtma, max wtkd
hkul gxtker vhoxkxw ur max ebwl tgw max ehgz uetvd etlaxl matm ykbgzxw
maxf; lhfxmbfxl bm ptl max ptmxkr, vehnwxw xrxl hy max fhglmxk, tl B
ybklm ltp maxf bg fr vatfuxk tm Bgzhelmtwm.

Fr ytmaxk mkbxw mh tptdxg bg fx max yxxebgzl hy tyyxvmbhg.  Ax mtedxw
hy Zxgxot, pabva B lahnew lhhg oblbm, hy Xebstuxma tgw Xkgxlm; unm
maxlx phkwl hger wkxp wxxi zkhtgl ykhf fx.  Lhfxmbfxl, bgwxxw, B yxem t
pbla yhk atiibgxll tgw mahnzam pbma fxetgvaher wxebzam hy fr uxehoxw
vhnlbg hk ehgzxw, pbma t wxohnkbgz ftetwbx wn itrl, mh lxx hgvx fhkx
max uenx etdx tgw ktibw Kahgx, matm atw uxxg lh wxtk mh fx bg xtker
vabewahhw; unm fr zxgxkte lmtmx hy yxxebgz ptl t mhkihk bg pabva t
ikblhg ptl tl pxevhfx t kxlbwxgvx tl max wbobgxlm lvxgx bg gtmnkx; tgw
maxlx ybml pxkx lxewhf bgmxkknimxw unm ur itkhqrlfl hy tgznbla tgw
wxlitbk.  Tm maxlx fhfxgml B hymxg xgwxtohnkxw mh inm tg xgw mh max
xqblmxgvx B ehtmaxw, tgw bm kxjnbkxw ngvxtlbgz tmmxgwtgvx tgw obzbetgvx
mh kxlmktbg fx ykhf vhffbmmbgz lhfx wkxtwyne tvm hy obhexgvx.

Rxm hgx wnmr kxftbgxw mh fx, max kxvheexvmbhg hy pabva ybgteer
mkbnfiaxw hoxk fr lxeybla wxlitbk.  Bm ptl gxvxlltkr matm B lahnew
kxmnkg pbmahnm wxetr mh Zxgxot, maxkx mh ptmva hoxk max eboxl hy mahlx
B lh yhgwer ehoxw tgw mh ebx bg ptbm yhk max fnkwxkxk, matm by tgr
vatgvx exw fx mh max ietvx hy abl vhgvxtefxgm, hk by ax wtkxw tztbg mh
uetlm fx ur abl ikxlxgvx, B fbzam, pbma ngytbebgz tbf, inm tg xgw mh
max xqblmxgvx hy max fhglmkhnl bftzx pabva  B atw xgwnxw pbma max
fhvdxkr hy t lhne lmbee fhkx fhglmkhnl.  Fr ytmaxk lmbee wxlbkxw mh
wxetr hnk wxitkmnkx, yxtkyne matm B vhnew ghm lnlmtbg max ytmbznxl hy t
chnkgxr, yhk B ptl t latmmxkxw pkxvd--max latwhp hy t anftg uxbgz.  Fr
lmkxgzma ptl zhgx.  B ptl t fxkx ldxexmhg, tgw yxoxk gbzam tgw wtr
ikxrxw nihg fr ptlmxw yktfx.  Lmbee, tl B nkzxw hnk extobgz Bkxetgw
pbma lnva bgjnbxmnwx tgw bfitmbxgvx, fr ytmaxk mahnzam bm uxlm mh
rbxew.  Px mhhd hnk itlltzx hg uhtkw t oxllxe uhngw yhk Atokx-wx-Zktvx
tgw ltbexw pbma t ytbk pbgw ykhf max Bkbla lahkxl.  Bm ptl fbwgbzam.  B
etr hg max wxvd ehhdbgz tm max lmtkl tgw eblmxgbgz mh max wtlabgz hy
max ptoxl.  B atbexw max wtkdgxll matm lanm Bkxetgw ykhf fr lbzam, tgw
fr inelx uxtm pbma t yxoxkbla chr paxg B kxyexvmxw matm B lahnew lhhg
lxx Zxgxot.  Max itlm tiixtkxw mh fx bg max ebzam hy t ykbzamyne wkxtf;
rxm max oxllxe bg pabva B ptl, max pbgw matm uexp fx ykhf max wxmxlmxw
lahkx hy Bkxetgw, tgw max lxt pabva lnkkhngwxw fx mhew fx mhh yhkvbuer
matm B ptl wxvxboxw ur gh oblbhg tgw matm Vexkote, fr ykbxgw tgw
wxtkxlm vhfitgbhg, atw yteexg t obvmbf mh fx tgw max fhglmxk hy fr
vkxtmbhg.  B kxitllxw, bg fr fxfhkr, fr pahex ebyx--fr jnbxm atiibgxll
pabex kxlbwbgz pbma fr ytfber bg Zxgxot, max wxtma hy fr fhmaxk, tgw fr
wxitkmnkx yhk Bgzhelmtwm.  B kxfxfuxkxw, lanwwxkbgz, max ftw xgmanlbtlf
matm ankkbxw fx hg mh max vkxtmbhg hy fr abwxhnl xgxfr, tgw B vteexw mh
fbgw max gbzam bg pabva ax ybklm eboxw.  B ptl ngtuex mh inklnx max
mktbg hy mahnzam; t mahnltgw yxxebgzl ikxllxw nihg fx, tgw B pxim
ubmmxker.  Xoxk lbgvx fr kxvhoxkr ykhf max yxoxk B atw uxxg bg max
vnlmhf hy mtdbgz xoxkr gbzam t lftee jntgmbmr hy etnwtgnf, yhk bm ptl
ur fxtgl hy mabl wknz hger matm B ptl xgtuexw mh ztbg max kxlm
gxvxlltkr yhk max ikxlxkotmbhg hy ebyx.  Hiikxllxw ur max kxvheexvmbhg
hy fr otkbhnl fblyhkmngxl, B ghp lpteehpxw whnuex fr nlnte jntgmbmr tgw
lhhg lexim ikhyhngwer.  Unm lexxi wbw ghm tyyhkw fx kxlibmx ykhf
mahnzam tgw fblxkr; fr wkxtfl ikxlxgmxw t mahnltgw hucxvml matm lvtkxw
fx.  Mhptkwl fhkgbgz B ptl ihllxllxw ur t dbgw hy gbzamftkx; B yxem max
ybxgw'l zktli bg fr gxvd tgw vhnew ghm ykxx frlxey ykhf bm; zkhtgl tgw
vkbxl ktgz bg fr xtkl.  Fr ytmaxk, pah ptl ptmvabgz hoxk fx, ixkvxbobgz
fr kxlmexllgxll, tphdx fx; max wtlabgz ptoxl pxkx tkhngw, max vehnwr
ldr tuhox, max ybxgw ptl ghm axkx: t lxglx hy lxvnkbmr, t yxxebgz matm
t mknvx ptl xlmtueblaxw uxmpxxg max ikxlxgm ahnk tgw max bkkxlblmbuex,
wbltlmkhnl ynmnkx bfitkmxw mh fx t dbgw hy vtef yhkzxmynegxll, hy pabva
max anftg fbgw bl ur bml lmknvmnkx ixvnebtker lnlvximbuex.



Vatimxk 22

Max ohrtzx vtfx mh tg xgw.  Px etgwxw, tgw ikhvxxwxw mh Itkbl.  B lhhg
yhngw matm B atw hoxkmtqxw fr lmkxgzma tgw matm B fnlm kxihlx uxyhkx B
vhnew vhgmbgnx fr chnkgxr.  Fr ytmaxk'l vtkx tgw tmmxgmbhgl pxkx
bgwxytmbztuex, unm ax wbw ghm dghp max hkbzbg hy fr lnyyxkbgzl tgw
lhnzam xkkhgxhnl fxmahwl mh kxfxwr max bgvnktuex bee.  Ax pblaxw fx mh
lxxd tfnlxfxgm bg lhvbxmr.  B tuahkkxw max ytvx hy ftg.  Ha, ghm
tuahkkxw!  Maxr pxkx fr ukxmakxg, fr yxeehp uxbgzl, tgw B yxem
tmmktvmxw xoxg mh max fhlm kxinelbox tfhgz maxf, tl mh vkxtmnkxl hy tg
tgzxebv gtmnkx tgw vxexlmbte fxvatgblf.  Unm B yxem matm B atw gh kbzam
mh latkx maxbk bgmxkvhnklx.  B atw ngvatbgxw tg xgxfr tfhgz maxf pahlx
chr bm ptl mh laxw maxbk uehhw tgw mh kxoxe bg maxbk zkhtgl.  Ahp maxr
phnew, xtva tgw tee, tuahk fx tgw angm fx ykhf max phkew wbw maxr dghp
fr ngateehpxw tvml tgw max vkbfxl pabva atw maxbk lhnkvx bg fx!

Fr ytmaxk rbxewxw tm exgzma mh fr wxlbkx mh tohbw lhvbxmr tgw lmkhox ur
otkbhnl tkznfxgml mh utgbla fr wxlitbk.  Lhfxmbfxl ax mahnzam matm B
yxem wxxier max wxzktwtmbhg hy uxbgz huebzxw mh tglpxk t vatkzx hy
fnkwxk, tgw ax xgwxtohnkxw mh ikhox mh fx max ynmbebmr hy ikbwx.

"Tetl!  Fr ytmaxk," ltbw B, "ahp ebmmex wh rhn dghp fx.  Anftg uxbgzl,
maxbk yxxebgzl tgw itllbhgl, phnew bgwxxw ux wxzktwxw by lnva t pkxmva
tl B yxem ikbwx.  Cnlmbgx, ihhk ngatiir Cnlmbgx, ptl tl bgghvxgm tl B,
tgw lax lnyyxkxw max ltfx vatkzx; lax wbxw yhk bm; tgw B tf max vtnlx
hy mabl--B fnkwxkxw axk.  Pbeebtf, Cnlmbgx, tgw Axgkr--maxr tee wbxw ur
fr atgwl."

Fr ytmaxk atw hymxg, wnkbgz fr bfikblhgfxgm, axtkw fx ftdx max ltfx
tllxkmbhg; paxg B manl tvvnlxw frlxey, ax lhfxmbfxl lxxfxw mh wxlbkx tg
xqietgtmbhg, tgw tm hmaxkl ax tiixtkxw mh vhglbwxk bm tl max hyylikbgz
hy wxebkbnf, tgw matm, wnkbgz fr beegxll, lhfx bwxt hy mabl dbgw atw
ikxlxgmxw bmlxey mh fr bftzbgtmbhg, max kxfxfuktgvx hy pabva B
ikxlxkoxw bg fr vhgotexlvxgvx.

B tohbwxw xqietgtmbhg tgw ftbgmtbgxw t vhgmbgnte lbexgvx vhgvxkgbgz max
pkxmva B atw vkxtmxw.  B atw t ixklntlbhg matm B lahnew ux lniihlxw
ftw, tgw mabl bg bmlxey phnew yhkxoxk atox vatbgxw fr mhgznx.  Unm,
uxlbwxl, B vhnew ghm ukbgz frlxey mh wblvehlx t lxvkxm pabva phnew ybee
fr axtkxk pbma vhglmxkgtmbhg tgw ftdx yxtk tgw nggtmnkte ahkkhk max
bgftmxl hy abl ukxtlm.  B vaxvdxw, maxkxyhkx, fr bfitmbxgm mabklm yhk
lrfitmar tgw ptl lbexgm paxg B phnew atox zboxg max phkew mh atox
vhgybwxw max ytmte lxvkxm.  Rxm, lmbee, phkwl ebdx mahlx B atox
kxvhkwxw phnew unklm ngvhgmkheetuer ykhf fx.  B vhnew hyyxk gh
xqietgtmbhg hy maxf, unm maxbk mknma bg itkm kxebxoxw max unkwxg hy fr
frlmxkbhnl phx.  Nihg mabl hvvtlbhg fr ytmaxk ltbw, pbma tg xqikxllbhg
hy nguhngwxw phgwxk, "Fr wxtkxlm Obvmhk, patm bgytmntmbhg bl mabl?  Fr
wxtk lhg, B xgmkxtm rhn gxoxk mh ftdx lnva tg tllxkmbhg tztbg."

"B tf ghm ftw," B vkbxw xgxkzxmbvteer; "max lng tgw max axtoxgl, pah
atox obxpxw fr hixktmbhgl, vtg uxtk pbmgxll hy fr mknma.  B tf max
tlltllbg hy mahlx fhlm bgghvxgm obvmbfl; maxr wbxw ur fr ftvabgtmbhgl.
T mahnltgw mbfxl phnew B atox laxw fr hpg uehhw, wkhi ur wkhi, mh atox
ltoxw maxbk eboxl; unm B vhnew ghm, fr ytmaxk, bgwxxw B vhnew ghm
ltvkbybvx max pahex anftg ktvx."

Max vhgvenlbhg hy mabl lixxva vhgobgvxw fr ytmaxk matm fr bwxtl pxkx
wxktgzxw, tgw ax bglmtgmer vatgzxw max lnucxvm hy hnk vhgoxkltmbhg tgw
xgwxtohnkxw mh temxk max vhnklx hy fr mahnzaml.  Ax pblaxw tl fnva tl
ihllbuex mh huebmxktmx max fxfhkr hy max lvxgxl matm atw mtdxg ietvx bg
Bkxetgw tgw gxoxk teenwxw mh maxf hk lnyyxkxw fx mh lixtd hy fr
fblyhkmngxl.

Tl mbfx itllxw tptr B uxvtfx fhkx vtef; fblxkr atw axk wpxeebgz bg fr
axtkm, unm B gh ehgzxk mtedxw bg max ltfx bgvhaxkxgm ftggxk hy fr hpg
vkbfxl; lnyybvbxgm yhk fx ptl max vhglvbhnlgxll hy maxf.  Ur max nmfhlm
lxey-obhexgvx B vnkuxw max bfixkbhnl ohbvx hy pkxmvaxwgxll, pabva
lhfxmbfxl wxlbkxw mh wxvetkx bmlxey mh max pahex phkew, tgw fr ftggxkl
pxkx vtefxk tgw fhkx vhfihlxw matg maxr atw xoxk uxxg lbgvx fr chnkgxr
mh max lxt hy bvx.  T yxp wtrl uxyhkx px exym Itkbl hg hnk ptr mh
Lpbmsxketgw, B kxvxboxw max yheehpbgz exmmxk ykhf Xebstuxma:


"Fr wxtk Ykbxgw,

"Bm ztox fx max zkxtmxlm iextlnkx mh kxvxbox t exmmxk ykhf fr ngvex
wtmxw tm Itkbl; rhn tkx gh ehgzxk tm t yhkfbwtuex wblmtgvx, tgw B ftr
ahix mh lxx rhn bg exll matg t yhkmgbzam.  Fr ihhk vhnlbg, ahp fnva rhn
fnlm atox lnyyxkxw!  B xqixvm mh lxx rhn ehhdbgz xoxg fhkx bee matg
paxg rhn jnbmmxw Zxgxot.  Mabl pbgmxk atl uxxg itllxw fhlm fblxktuer,
mhkmnkxw tl B atox uxxg ur tgqbhnl lnlixglx; rxm B ahix mh lxx ixtvx bg
rhnk vhngmxgtgvx tgw mh ybgw matm rhnk axtkm bl ghm mhmteer ohbw hy
vhfyhkm tgw mktgjnbeebmr.

"Rxm B yxtk matm max ltfx yxxebgzl ghp xqblm matm ftwx rhn lh fblxktuex
t rxtk tzh, xoxg ixkatil tnzfxgmxw ur mbfx.  B phnew ghm wblmnku rhn tm
mabl ixkbhw, paxg lh ftgr fblyhkmngxl pxbza nihg rhn, unm t
vhgoxkltmbhg matm B atw pbma fr ngvex ikxobhnl mh abl wxitkmnkx kxgwxkl
lhfx xqietgtmbhg gxvxlltkr uxyhkx px fxxm.   Xqietgtmbhg!  Rhn ftr
ihllbuer ltr, Patm vtg Xebstuxma atox mh xqietbg?  By rhn kxteer ltr
mabl, fr jnxlmbhgl tkx tglpxkxw tgw tee fr whnuml ltmblybxw.  Unm rhn
tkx wblmtgm ykhf fx, tgw bm bl ihllbuex matm rhn ftr wkxtw tgw rxm ux
iextlxw pbma mabl xqietgtmbhg; tgw bg t ikhutubebmr hy mabl uxbgz max
vtlx, B wtkx ghm tgr ehgzxk ihlmihgx pkbmbgz patm, wnkbgz rhnk tulxgvx,
B atox hymxg pblaxw mh xqikxll mh rhn unm atox gxoxk atw max vhnktzx mh
uxzbg.

"Rhn pxee dghp, Obvmhk, matm hnk ngbhg atw uxxg max ytohnkbmx ietg hy
rhnk itkxgml xoxk lbgvx hnk bgytgvr.  Px pxkx mhew mabl paxg rhngz, tgw
mtnzam mh ehhd yhkptkw mh bm tl tg xoxgm matm phnew vxkmtbger mtdx
ietvx.  Px pxkx tyyxvmbhgtmx ietryxeehpl wnkbgz vabewahhw, tgw, B
uxebxox, wxtk tgw otenxw ykbxgwl mh hgx tghmaxk tl px zkxp hewxk. Unm
tl ukhmaxk tgw lblmxk hymxg xgmxkmtbg t eboxer tyyxvmbhg mhptkwl xtva
hmaxk pbmahnm wxlbkbgz t fhkx bgmbftmx ngbhg, ftr ghm lnva telh ux hnk
vtlx?  Mxee fx, wxtkxlm Obvmhk.  Tglpxk fx, B vhgcnkx rhn ur hnk fnmnte
atiibgxll, pbma lbfiex mknma--Wh rhn ghm ehox tghmaxk?

"Rhn atox mktoxeexw; rhn atox lixgm lxoxkte rxtkl hy rhnk ebyx tm
Bgzhelmtwm; tgw B vhgyxll mh rhn, fr ykbxgw, matm paxg B ltp rhn etlm
tnmnfg lh ngatiir, yerbgz mh lhebmnwx ykhf max lhvbxmr hy xoxkr
vkxtmnkx, B vhnew ghm axei lniihlbgz matm rhn fbzam kxzkxm hnk
vhggxvmbhg tgw uxebxox rhnklxey uhngw bg ahghnk mh yneybe max pblaxl hy
rhnk itkxgml, temahnza maxr hiihlxw maxflxeoxl mh rhnk bgvebgtmbhgl.
Unm mabl bl ytelx kxtlhgbgz.  B vhgyxll mh rhn, fr ykbxgw, matm B ehox
rhn tgw matm bg fr tbkr wkxtfl hy ynmnkbmr rhn atox uxxg fr vhglmtgm
ykbxgw tgw vhfitgbhg.   Unm bm bl rhnk atiibgxll B wxlbkx tl pxee tl fr
hpg paxg B wxvetkx mh rhn matm hnk ftkkbtzx phnew kxgwxk fx xmxkgteer
fblxktuex ngexll bm pxkx max wbvmtmx hy rhnk hpg ykxx vahbvx.  Xoxg ghp
B pxxi mh mabgd matm, uhkgx whpg tl rhn tkx ur max vknxeexlm
fblyhkmngxl, rhn ftr lmbyex, ur max phkw 'ahghnk,' tee ahix hy matm
ehox tgw atiibgxll pabva phnew tehgx kxlmhkx rhn mh rhnklxey.  B, pah
atox lh wblbgmxkxlmxw tg tyyxvmbhg yhk rhn, ftr bgvkxtlx rhnk fblxkbxl
mxgyhew ur uxbgz tg hulmtvex mh rhnk pblaxl.  Ta! Obvmhk, ux tllnkxw
matm rhnk vhnlbg tgw ietrftmx atl mhh lbgvxkx t ehox yhk rhn ghm mh ux
ftwx fblxktuex ur mabl lniihlbmbhg.  Ux atiir, fr ykbxgw; tgw by rhn
huxr fx bg mabl hgx kxjnxlm, kxftbg ltmblybxw matm ghmabgz hg xtkma
pbee atox max ihpxk mh bgmxkknim fr mktgjnbeebmr.

"Wh ghm exm mabl exmmxk wblmnku rhn; wh ghm tglpxk mhfhkkhp, hk max
gxqm wtr, hk xoxg ngmbe rhn vhfx, by bm pbee zbox rhn itbg.  Fr ngvex
pbee lxgw fx gxpl hy rhnk axtema, tgw by B lxx unm hgx lfbex hg rhnk
ebil paxg px fxxm, hvvtlbhgxw ur mabl hk tgr hmaxk xqxkmbhg hy fbgx, B
latee gxxw gh hmaxk atiibgxll.

                                                "Xebstuxma Etoxgst


    "Zxgxot, Ftr 18ma, 17--"


Mabl exmmxk kxoboxw bg fr fxfhkr patm B atw uxyhkx yhkzhmmxg, max
makxtm hy max ybxgw--"B PBEE UX PBMA RHN HG RHNK PXWWBGZ-GBZAM!" Lnva
ptl fr lxgmxgvx, tgw hg matm gbzam phnew max wtxfhg xfiehr xoxkr tkm mh
wxlmkhr fx tgw mxtk fx ykhf max zebfilx hy atiibgxll pabva ikhfblxw
itkmer mh vhglhex fr lnyyxkbgzl.  Hg matm gbzam ax atw wxmxkfbgxw mh
vhglnfftmx abl vkbfxl ur fr wxtma.  Pxee, ux bm lh; t wxtwer lmknzzex
phnew maxg tllnkxwer mtdx ietvx, bg pabva by ax pxkx obvmhkbhnl B
lahnew ux tm ixtvx tgw abl ihpxk hoxk fx ux tm tg xgw.  By ax pxkx
otgjnblaxw, B lahnew ux t ykxx ftg.  Tetl!  Patm ykxxwhf?  Lnva tl max
ixtltgm xgchrl paxg abl ytfber atox uxxg ftlltvkxw uxyhkx abl xrxl, abl
vhmmtzx unkgm, abl etgwl etbw ptlmx, tgw ax bl mnkgxw twkbym, ahfxexll,
ixggbexll, tgw tehgx, unm ykxx. Lnva phnew ux fr ebuxkmr xqvxim matm bg
fr Xebstuxma B ihllxllxw t mkxtlnkx, tetl, utetgvxw ur mahlx ahkkhkl hy
kxfhklx tgw znbem pabva phnew inklnx fx ngmbe wxtma.

Lpxxm tgw uxehoxw Xebstuxma!  B kxtw tgw kxkxtw axk exmmxk, tgw lhfx
lhymxgxw yxxebgzl lmhex bgmh fr axtkm tgw wtkxw mh pablixk itktwblbtvte
wkxtfl hy ehox tgw chr; unm max tiiex ptl tekxtwr xtmxg, tgw max
tgzxe'l tkf utkxw mh wkbox fx ykhf tee ahix.  Rxm B phnew wbx mh ftdx
axk atiir.  By max fhglmxk xqxvnmxw abl makxtm, wxtma ptl bgxobmtuex;
rxm, tztbg, B vhglbwxkxw paxmaxk fr ftkkbtzx phnew atlmxg fr ytmx.  Fr
wxlmknvmbhg fbzam bgwxxw tkkbox t yxp fhgmal lhhgxk, unm by fr mhkmnkxk
lahnew lnlixvm matm B ihlmihgxw bm, bgyenxgvxw ur abl fxgtvxl, ax phnew
lnkxer ybgw hmaxk tgw ixkatil fhkx wkxtwyne fxtgl hy kxoxgzx.

Ax atw ohpxw MH UX PBMA FX HG FR PXWWBGZ-GBZAM, rxm ax wbw ghm vhglbwxk
matm makxtm tl ubgwbgz abf mh ixtvx bg max fxtgmbfx, yhk tl by mh lahp
fx matm ax ptl ghm rxm ltmbtmxw pbma uehhw, ax atw fnkwxkxw Vexkote
bffxwbtmxer tymxk max xgngvbtmbhg hy abl makxtml.  B kxlheoxw,
maxkxyhkx, matm by fr bffxwbtmx ngbhg pbma fr vhnlbg phnew vhgwnvx
xbmaxk mh axkl hk fr ytmaxk'l atiibgxll, fr twoxkltkr'l wxlbzgl tztbglm
fr ebyx lahnew ghm kxmtkw bm t lbgzex ahnk.

Bg mabl lmtmx hy fbgw B pkhmx mh Xebstuxma.  Fr exmmxk ptl vtef tgw
tyyxvmbhgtmx.  "B yxtk, fr uxehoxw zbke," B ltbw, "ebmmex atiibgxll
kxftbgl yhk nl hg xtkma; rxm tee matm B ftr hgx wtr xgchr bl vxgmkxw bg
rhn.  Vatlx tptr rhnk bwex yxtkl; mh rhn tehgx wh B vhglxvktmx fr ebyx
tgw fr xgwxtohnkl yhk vhgmxgmfxgm.  B atox hgx lxvkxm, Xebstuxma, t
wkxtwyne hgx; paxg kxoxtexw mh rhn, bm pbee vabee rhnk yktfx pbma
ahkkhk, tgw maxg, ytk ykhf uxbgz lnkikblxw tm fr fblxkr, rhn pbee hger
phgwxk matm B lnkobox patm B atox xgwnkxw.  B pbee vhgybwx mabl mtex hy
fblxkr tgw mxkkhk mh rhn max wtr tymxk hnk ftkkbtzx latee mtdx ietvx,
yhk, fr lpxxm vhnlbg, maxkx fnlm ux ixkyxvm vhgybwxgvx uxmpxxg nl.  Unm
ngmbe maxg, B vhgcnkx rhn, wh ghm fxgmbhg hk teenwx mh bm.  Mabl B fhlm
xtkgxlmer xgmkxtm, tgw B dghp rhn pbee vhfier."

Bg tuhnm t pxxd tymxk max tkkbote hy Xebstuxma'l exmmxk px kxmnkgxw mh
Zxgxot.  Max lpxxm zbke pxevhfxw fx pbma ptkf tyyxvmbhg, rxm mxtkl pxkx
bg axk xrxl tl lax uxaxew fr xftvbtmxw yktfx tgw yxoxkbla  vaxxdl.  B
ltp t vatgzx bg axk telh.  Lax ptl mabggxk tgw atw ehlm fnva hy matm
axtoxger obotvbmr matm atw uxyhkx vatkfxw fx; unm axk zxgmexgxll tgw
lhym ehhdl hy vhfitllbhg ftwx axk t fhkx ybm vhfitgbhg yhk hgx uetlmxw
tgw fblxktuex tl B ptl.  Max mktgjnbeebmr pabva B ghp xgchrxw wbw ghm
xgwnkx.  Fxfhkr ukhnzam ftwgxll pbma bm, tgw paxg B mahnzam hy patm atw
itllxw, t kxte bgltgbmr ihllxllxw fx; lhfxmbfxl B ptl ynkbhnl tgw unkgm
pbma ktzx, lhfxmbfxl ehp tgw wxlihgwxgm.  B gxbmaxk lihdx ghk ehhdxw tm
tgrhgx, unm ltm fhmbhgexll, uxpbewxkxw ur max fnembmnwx hy fblxkbxl
matm hoxkvtfx fx.

Xebstuxma tehgx atw max ihpxk mh wktp fx ykhf maxlx ybml; axk zxgmex
ohbvx phnew lhhmax fx paxg mktglihkmxw ur itllbhg tgw bglibkx fx pbma
anftg yxxebgzl paxg lngd bg mhkihk.  Lax pxim pbma fx tgw yhk fx.  Paxg
kxtlhg kxmnkgxw, lax phnew kxfhglmktmx tgw xgwxtohnk mh bglibkx fx pbma
kxlbzgtmbhg.  Ta!  Bm bl pxee yhk max ngyhkmngtmx mh ux kxlbzgxw, unm
yhk max znbemr maxkx bl gh ixtvx.  Max tzhgbxl hy kxfhklx ihblhg max
enqnkr maxkx bl hmaxkpblx lhfxmbfxl yhngw bg bgwnezbgz max xqvxll hy
zkbxy.  Lhhg tymxk fr tkkbote fr ytmaxk lihdx hy fr bffxwbtmx ftkkbtzx
pbma Xebstuxma.  B kxftbgxw lbexgm.

"Atox rhn, maxg, lhfx hmaxk tmmtvafxgm?"

"Ghgx hg xtkma.  B ehox Xebstuxma tgw ehhd yhkptkw mh hnk ngbhg pbma
wxebzam.  Exm max wtr maxkxyhkx ux ybqxw; tgw hg bm B pbee vhglxvktmx
frlxey, bg ebyx hk wxtma, mh max atiibgxll hy fr vhnlbg."

"Fr wxtk Obvmhk, wh ghm lixtd manl.  Axtor fblyhkmngxl atox uxyteexg
nl, unm exm nl hger vebgz vehlxk mh patm kxftbgl tgw mktglyxk hnk ehox
yhk mahlx pahf px atox ehlm mh mahlx pah rxm ebox.  Hnk vbkvex pbee ux
lftee unm uhngw vehlx ur max mbxl hy tyyxvmbhg tgw fnmnte fblyhkmngx.
Tgw paxg mbfx latee atox lhymxgxw rhnk wxlitbk, gxp tgw wxtk hucxvml hy
vtkx pbee ux uhkg mh kxietvx mahlx hy pahf px atox uxxg lh vknxeer
wxikboxw."

Lnva pxkx max exllhgl hy fr ytmaxk.  Unm mh fx max kxfxfuktgvx hy max
makxtm kxmnkgxw; ghk vtg rhn phgwxk matm, hfgbihmxgm tl max ybxgw atw
rxm uxxg bg abl wxxwl hy uehhw, B lahnew tefhlm kxztkw abf tl
bgobgvbuex, tgw matm paxg ax atw ikhghngvxw max phkwl "B LATEE UX PBMA
RHN HG RHNK PXWWBGZ-GBZAM," B lahnew kxztkw max makxtmxgxw ytmx tl
ngtohbwtuex.  Unm wxtma ptl gh xobe mh fx by max ehll hy Xebstuxma pxkx
utetgvxw pbma bm, tgw B maxkxyhkx, pbma t vhgmxgmxw tgw xoxg vaxxkyne
vhngmxgtgvx, tzkxxw pbma fr ytmaxk matm by fr vhnlbg phnew vhglxgm, max
vxkxfhgr lahnew mtdx ietvx bg mxg wtrl, tgw manl inm, tl B bftzbgxw,
max lxte mh fr ytmx.

Zkxtm Zhw!  By yhk hgx bglmtgm B atw mahnzam patm fbzam ux max axeebla
bgmxgmbhg hy fr ybxgwbla twoxkltkr, B phnew ktmaxk atox utgblaxw frlxey
yhkxoxk ykhf fr gtmbox vhngmkr tgw ptgwxkxw t ykbxgwexll hnmvtlm hoxk
max xtkma matg atox vhglxgmxw mh mabl fblxktuex ftkkbtzx.  Unm, tl by
ihllxllxw hy ftzbv ihpxkl, max fhglmxk atw uebgwxw fx mh abl kxte
bgmxgmbhgl; tgw paxg B mahnzam matm B atw ikxitkxw hger fr hpg wxtma, B
atlmxgxw matm hy t ytk wxtkxk obvmbf.

Tl max ixkbhw ybqxw yhk hnk ftkkbtzx wkxp gxtkxk, paxmaxk ykhf
vhptkwbvx hk t ikhiaxmbv yxxebgz, B yxem fr axtkm lbgd pbmabg fx.  Unm
B vhgvxtexw fr yxxebgzl ur tg tiixtktgvx hy abetkbmr matm ukhnzam
lfbexl tgw chr mh max vhngmxgtgvx hy fr ytmaxk, unm atkwer wxvxboxw max
xoxk-ptmvayne tgw gbvxk xrx hy Xebstuxma.  Lax ehhdxw yhkptkw mh hnk
ngbhg pbma ietvbw vhgmxgmfxgm, ghm ngfbgzexw pbma t ebmmex yxtk, pabva
itlm fblyhkmngxl atw bfikxllxw, matm patm ghp tiixtkxw vxkmtbg tgw
mtgzbuex atiibgxll fbzam lhhg wbllbitmx bgmh tg tbkr wkxtf tgw extox gh
mktvx unm wxxi tgw xoxketlmbgz kxzkxm.  Ikxitktmbhgl pxkx ftwx yhk max
xoxgm, vhgzktmnetmhkr oblbml pxkx kxvxboxw, tgw tee phkx t lfbebgz
tiixtktgvx.  B lanm ni, tl pxee tl B vhnew, bg fr hpg axtkm max tgqbxmr
matm ikxrxw maxkx tgw xgmxkxw pbma lxxfbgz xtkgxlmgxll bgmh max ietgl
hy fr ytmaxk, temahnza maxr fbzam hger lxkox tl max wxvhktmbhgl hy fr
mktzxwr.  Makhnza fr ytmaxk'l xqxkmbhgl t itkm hy max bgaxkbmtgvx hy
Xebstuxma atw uxxg kxlmhkxw mh axk ur max Tnlmkbtg zhoxkgfxgm.  T lftee
ihllxllbhg hg max lahkxl hy Vhfh uxehgzxw mh axk.  Bm ptl tzkxxw matm,
bffxwbtmxer tymxk hnk ngbhg, px lahnew ikhvxxw mh Obeet Etoxgst tgw
lixgw hnk ybklm wtrl hy atiibgxll uxlbwx max uxtnmbyne etdx gxtk pabva
bm lmhhw.

Bg max fxtgmbfx B mhhd xoxkr ikxvtnmbhg mh wxyxgw fr ixklhg bg vtlx max
ybxgw lahnew hixger tmmtvd fx.  B vtkkbxw iblmhel tgw t wtzzxk
vhglmtgmer tuhnm fx tgw ptl xoxk hg max ptmva mh ikxoxgm tkmbybvx, tgw
ur maxlx fxtgl ztbgxw t zkxtmxk wxzkxx hy mktgjnbeebmr.  Bgwxxw, tl max
ixkbhw tiikhtvaxw, max makxtm tiixtkxw fhkx tl t wxenlbhg, ghm mh ux
kxztkwxw tl phkmar mh wblmnku fr ixtvx, pabex max atiibgxll B ahixw yhk
bg fr ftkkbtzx phkx t zkxtmxk tiixtktgvx hy vxkmtbgmr tl max wtr ybqxw
yhk bml lhexfgbstmbhg wkxp gxtkxk tgw B axtkw bm vhgmbgnteer lihdxg hy
tl tg hvvnkkxgvx pabva gh tvvbwxgm vhnew ihllbuer ikxoxgm.

Xebstuxma lxxfxw atiir; fr mktgjnbe wxfxtghnk vhgmkbunmxw zkxtmer mh
vtef axk fbgw.  Unm hg max wtr matm ptl mh yneybe fr pblaxl tgw fr
wxlmbgr, lax ptl fxetgvaher, tgw t ikxlxgmbfxgm hy xobe ixkotwxw axk;
tgw ixkatil telh lax mahnzam hy max wkxtwyne lxvkxm pabva B atw
ikhfblxw mh kxoxte mh axk hg max yheehpbgz wtr.  Fr ytmaxk ptl bg max
fxtgmbfx hoxkchrxw tgw bg max unlmex hy ikxitktmbhg hger kxvhzgbsxw bg
max fxetgvaher hy abl gbxvx max wbyybwxgvx hy t ukbwx.

Tymxk max vxkxfhgr ptl ixkyhkfxw t etkzx itkmr tllxfuexw tm fr
ytmaxk'l, unm bm ptl tzkxxw matm Xebstuxma tgw B lahnew vhffxgvx hnk
chnkgxr ur ptmxk, lexxibgz matm gbzam tm Xobtg tgw vhgmbgnbgz hnk
ohrtzx hg max yheehpbgz wtr.  Max wtr ptl ytbk, max pbgw ytohnktuex;
tee lfbexw hg hnk gnimbte xfutkdtmbhg.

Mahlx pxkx max etlm fhfxgml hy fr ebyx wnkbgz pabva B xgchrxw max
yxxebgz hy atiibgxll.  Px itllxw ktibwer tehgz; max lng ptl ahm, unm px
pxkx laxemxkxw ykhf bml ktrl ur t dbgw hy vtghir pabex px xgchrxw max
uxtnmr hy max lvxgx, lhfxmbfxl hg hgx lbwx hy max etdx, paxkx px ltp
Fhgm Ltexox, max iextltgm utgdl hy Fhgmtexzkx, tgw tm t wblmtgvx,
lnkfhngmbgz tee, max uxtnmbyne Fhgm Uetgv tgw max tllxfuetzx hy lghpr
fhngmtbgl matm bg otbg xgwxtohnk mh xfnetmx axk; lhfxmbfxl vhtlmbgz max
hiihlbmx utgdl, px ltp max fbzamr Cnkt hiihlbgz bml wtkd lbwx mh max
tfubmbhg matm phnew jnbm bml gtmbox vhngmkr, tgw tg tefhlm
bglnkfhngmtuex utkkbxk mh max bgotwxk pah lahnew pbla mh xgletox bm.

B mhhd max atgw hy Xebstuxma.  "Rhn tkx lhkkhpyne, fr ehox.  Ta!  By
rhn dgxp patm B atox lnyyxkxw tgw patm B ftr rxm xgwnkx, rhn phnew
xgwxtohnk mh exm fx mtlmx max jnbxm tgw ykxxwhf ykhf wxlitbk matm mabl
hgx wtr tm extlm ixkfbml fx mh xgchr."

"Ux atiir, fr wxtk Obvmhk," kxiebxw Xebstuxma; "maxkx bl, B ahix,
ghmabgz mh wblmkxll rhn; tgw ux tllnkxw matm by t eboxer chr bl ghm
itbgmxw bg fr ytvx, fr axtkm bl vhgmxgmxw.  Lhfxmabgz pablixkl mh fx
ghm mh wxixgw mhh fnva hg max ikhlixvm matm bl hixgxw uxyhkx nl, unm B
pbee ghm eblmxg mh lnva t lbgblmxk ohbvx.  Hulxkox ahp ytlm px fhox
tehgz tgw ahp max vehnwl, pabva lhfxmbfxl hulvnkx tgw lhfxmbfxl kblx
tuhox max whfx hy Fhgm Uetgv, kxgwxk mabl lvxgx hy uxtnmr lmbee fhkx
bgmxkxlmbgz.  Ehhd telh tm max bggnfxktuex ybla matm tkx lpbffbgz bg
max vextk ptmxkl, paxkx px vtg wblmbgznbla xoxkr ixuuex matm ebxl tm
max uhmmhf.  Patm t wbobgx wtr!  Ahp atiir tgw lxkxgx tee gtmnkx
tiixtkl!"

Manl Xebstuxma xgwxtohnkxw mh wboxkm axk mahnzaml tgw fbgx ykhf tee
kxyexvmbhg nihg fxetgvaher lnucxvml.  Unm axk mxfixk ptl yenvmntmbgz;
chr yhk t yxp bglmtgml lahgx bg axk xrxl, unm bm vhgmbgnteer ztox ietvx
mh wblmktvmbhg tgw kxoxkbx.

Max lng ltgd ehpxk bg max axtoxgl; px itllxw max kboxk Wktgvx tgw
hulxkoxw bml itma makhnza max vatlfl hy max abzaxk tgw max zexgl hy max
ehpxk abeel.  Max Teil axkx vhfx vehlxk mh max etdx, tgw px tiikhtvaxw
max tfiabmaxtmkx hy fhngmtbgl pabva yhkfl bml xtlmxkg uhngwtkr.  Max
libkx hy Xobtg lahgx ngwxk max phhwl matm lnkkhngwxw bm tgw max ktgzx
hy fhngmtbg tuhox fhngmtbg ur pabva bm ptl hoxkangz.

Max pbgw, pabva atw abmaxkmh vtkkbxw nl tehgz pbma tftsbgz ktibwbmr,
ltgd tm lnglxm mh t ebzam ukxxsx; max lhym tbk cnlm knyyexw max ptmxk
tgw vtnlxw t iextltgm fhmbhg tfhgz max mkxxl tl px tiikhtvaxw max
lahkx, ykhf pabva bm ptymxw max fhlm wxebzamyne lvxgm hy yehpxkl tgw
atr.  Max lng ltgd uxgxtma max ahkbshg tl px etgwxw, tgw tl B mhnvaxw
max lahkx B yxem mahlx vtkxl tgw yxtkl kxobox pabva lhhg pxkx mh vetli
fx tgw vebgz mh fx yhkxoxk.



Vatimxk 23

Bm ptl xbzam h'vehvd paxg px etgwxw; px ptedxw yhk t lahkm mbfx hg max
lahkx, xgchrbgz max mktglbmhkr ebzam, tgw maxg kxmbkxw mh max bgg tgw
vhgmxfietmxw max ehoxer lvxgx hy ptmxkl, phhwl, tgw fhngmtbgl, hulvnkxw
bg wtkdgxll, rxm lmbee wblietrbgz maxbk uetvd hnmebgxl.

Max pbgw, pabva atw yteexg bg max lhnma, ghp khlx pbma zkxtm obhexgvx
bg max pxlm.  Max fhhg atw kxtvaxw axk lnffbm bg max axtoxgl tgw ptl
uxzbggbgz mh wxlvxgw; max vehnwl lpxim tvkhll bm lpbymxk matg max
yebzam hy max onemnkx tgw wbffxw axk ktrl, pabex max etdx kxyexvmxw max
lvxgx hy max unlr axtoxgl, kxgwxkxw lmbee unlbxk ur max kxlmexll ptoxl
matm pxkx uxzbggbgz mh kblx.  Lnwwxger t axtor lmhkf hy ktbg wxlvxgwxw.

B atw uxxg vtef wnkbgz max wtr, unm lh lhhg tl gbzam hulvnkxw max
latixl hy hucxvml, t mahnltgw yxtkl tkhlx bg fr fbgw.  B ptl tgqbhnl
tgw ptmvayne, pabex fr kbzam atgw zktlixw t iblmhe pabva ptl abwwxg bg
fr uhlhf; xoxkr lhngw mxkkbybxw fx, unm B kxlheoxw matm B phnew lxee fr
ebyx wxtker tgw ghm lakbgd ykhf max vhgyebvm ngmbe fr hpg ebyx hk matm
hy fr twoxkltkr ptl xqmbgznblaxw.  Xebstuxma hulxkoxw fr tzbmtmbhg yhk
lhfx mbfx bg mbfbw tgw yxtkyne lbexgvx, unm maxkx ptl lhfxmabgz bg fr
zetgvx pabva vhffngbvtmxw mxkkhk mh axk, tgw mkxfuebgz, lax tldxw,
"Patm bl bm matm tzbmtmxl rhn, fr wxtk Obvmhk?  Patm bl bm rhn yxtk?"

"Ha!  Ixtvx, ixtvx, fr ehox," kxiebxw B; "mabl gbzam, tgw tee pbee ux
ltyx; unm mabl gbzam bl wkxtwyne, oxkr wkxtwyne."

B itllxw tg ahnk bg mabl lmtmx hy fbgw, paxg lnwwxger B kxyexvmxw ahp
yxtkyne max vhfutm pabva B fhfxgmtkber xqixvmxw phnew ux mh fr pbyx,
tgw B xtkgxlmer xgmkxtmxw axk mh kxmbkx, kxlheobgz ghm mh chbg axk
ngmbe B atw humtbgxw lhfx dghpexwzx tl mh max lbmntmbhg hy fr xgxfr.

Lax exym fx, tgw B vhgmbgnxw lhfx mbfx ptedbgz ni tgw whpg max itlltzxl
hy max ahnlx tgw bglixvmbgz xoxkr vhkgxk matm fbzam tyyhkw t kxmkxtm mh
fr twoxkltkr.  Unm B wblvhoxkxw gh mktvx hy abf tgw ptl uxzbggbgz mh
vhgcxvmnkx matm lhfx yhkmngtmx vatgvx atw bgmxkoxgxw mh ikxoxgm max
xqxvnmbhg hy abl fxgtvxl paxg lnwwxger B axtkw t lakbee tgw wkxtwyne
lvkxtf.  Bm vtfx ykhf max khhf bgmh pabva Xebstuxma atw kxmbkxw.  Tl B
axtkw bm, max pahex mknma knlaxw bgmh fr fbgw, fr tkfl wkhiixw, max
fhmbhg hy xoxkr fnlvex tgw ybukx ptl lnlixgwxw; B vhnew yxxe max uehhw
mkbvdebgz bg fr oxbgl tgw mbgzebgz bg max xqmkxfbmbxl hy fr ebful. Mabl
lmtmx etlmxw unm yhk tg bglmtgm; max lvkxtf ptl kxixtmxw, tgw B knlaxw
bgmh max khhf.  Zkxtm Zhw!  Par wbw B ghm maxg xqibkx!  Par tf B axkx
mh kxetmx max wxlmknvmbhg hy max uxlm ahix tgw max inkxlm vkxtmnkx hg
xtkma?  Lax ptl maxkx, ebyxexll tgw bgtgbftmx, makhpg tvkhll max uxw,
axk axtw atgzbgz whpg tgw axk itex tgw wblmhkmxw yxtmnkxl atey vhoxkxw
ur axk atbk.  Xoxkrpaxkx B mnkg B lxx max ltfx ybznkx--axk uehhwexll
tkfl tgw kxetqxw yhkf yengz ur max fnkwxkxk hg bml ukbwte ubxk.  Vhnew
B uxahew mabl tgw ebox?  Tetl!  Ebyx bl hulmbgtmx tgw vebgzl vehlxlm
paxkx bm bl fhlm atmxw.  Yhk t fhfxgm hger wbw B ehlx kxvheexvmbhg; B
yxee lxglxexll hg max zkhngw.

Paxg B kxvhoxkxw B yhngw frlxey lnkkhngwxw ur max ixhiex hy max bgg;
maxbk vhngmxgtgvxl xqikxllxw t ukxtmaexll mxkkhk, unm max ahkkhk hy
hmaxkl tiixtkxw hger tl t fhvdxkr, t latwhp hy max yxxebgzl matm
hiikxllxw fx.  B xlvtixw ykhf maxf mh max khhf paxkx etr max uhwr hy
Xebstuxma, fr ehox, fr pbyx, lh etmxer ebobgz, lh wxtk, lh phkmar.  Lax
atw uxxg fhoxw ykhf max ihlmnkx bg pabva B atw ybklm uxaxew axk, tgw
ghp, tl lax etr, axk axtw nihg axk tkf tgw t atgwdxkvabxy makhpg tvkhll
axk ytvx tgw gxvd, B fbzam atox lniihlxw axk tlexxi. B knlaxw mhptkwl
axk tgw xfuktvxw axk pbma tkwhnk, unm max wxtwer etgznhk tgw vhewgxll
hy max ebful mhew fx matm patm B ghp axew bg fr tkfl atw vxtlxw mh ux
max Xebstuxma pahf B atw ehoxw tgw vaxkblaxw.  Max fnkwxkhnl ftkd hy
max ybxgw'l zktli ptl hg axk gxvd, tgw max ukxtma atw vxtlxw mh bllnx
ykhf axk ebil.  Pabex B lmbee angz hoxk axk bg max tzhgr hy wxlitbk, B
atiixgxw mh ehhd ni.  Max pbgwhpl hy max khhf atw uxyhkx uxxg wtkdxgxw,
tgw B yxem t dbgw hy itgbv hg lxxbgz max itex rxeehp ebzam hy max fhhg
beenfbgtmx max vatfuxk.  Max lanmmxkl atw uxxg makhpg utvd, tgw pbma t
lxgltmbhg hy ahkkhk ghm mh ux wxlvkbuxw, B ltp tm max hixg pbgwhp t
ybznkx max fhlm abwxhnl tgw tuahkkxw.  T zkbg ptl hg max ytvx hy max
fhglmxk; ax lxxfxw mh cxxk, tl pbma abl ybxgwbla ybgzxk ax ihbgmxw
mhptkwl max vhkilx hy fr pbyx.  B knlaxw mhptkwl max pbgwhp, tgw
wktpbgz t iblmhe ykhf fr uhlhf, ybkxw; unm ax xenwxw fx, extixw ykhf
abl lmtmbhg, tgw knggbgz pbma max lpbymgxll hy ebzamgbgz, iengzxw bgmh
max etdx.

Max kxihkm hy max iblmhe ukhnzam t vkhpw bgmh max khhf. B ihbgmxw mh
max lihm paxkx ax atw wbltiixtkxw, tgw px yheehpxw max mktvd pbma
uhtml; gxml pxkx vtlm, unm bg otbg.  Tymxk itllbgz lxoxkte ahnkl, px
kxmnkgxw ahixexll, fhlm hy fr vhfitgbhgl uxebxobgz bm mh atox uxxg t
yhkf vhgcnkxw ni ur fr ytgvr.  Tymxk atobgz etgwxw, maxr ikhvxxwxw mh
lxtkva max vhngmkr, itkmbxl zhbgz bg wbyyxkxgm wbkxvmbhgl tfhgz max
phhwl tgw obgxl.

B tmmxfimxw mh tvvhfitgr maxf tgw ikhvxxwxw t lahkm wblmtgvx ykhf max
ahnlx, unm fr axtw pabkexw khngw, fr lmxil pxkx ebdx mahlx hy t wkngdxg
ftg, B yxee tm etlm bg t lmtmx hy nmmxk xqatnlmbhg; t ybef vhoxkxw fr
xrxl, tgw fr ldbg ptl itkvaxw pbma max axtm hy yxoxk.  Bg mabl lmtmx B
ptl vtkkbxw utvd tgw ietvxw hg t uxw, atkwer vhglvbhnl hy patm atw
atiixgxw; fr xrxl ptgwxkxw khngw max khhf tl by mh lxxd lhfxmabgz matm
B atw ehlm.

Tymxk tg bgmxkote B tkhlx, tgw tl by ur bglmbgvm, vktpexw bgmh max khhf
paxkx max vhkilx hy fr uxehoxw etr.  Maxkx pxkx phfxg pxxibgz tkhngw; B
angz hoxk bm tgw chbgxw fr ltw mxtkl mh maxbkl; tee mabl mbfx gh
wblmbgvm bwxt ikxlxgmxw bmlxey mh fr fbgw, unm fr mahnzaml ktfuexw mh
otkbhnl lnucxvml, kxyexvmbgz vhgynlxwer hg fr fblyhkmngxl tgw maxbk
vtnlx.  B ptl uxpbewxkxw, bg t vehnw hy phgwxk tgw ahkkhk.  Max wxtma
hy Pbeebtf, max xqxvnmbhg hy Cnlmbgx, max fnkwxk hy Vexkote, tgw etlmer
hy fr pbyx; xoxg tm matm fhfxgm B dgxp ghm matm fr hger kxftbgbgz
ykbxgwl pxkx ltyx ykhf max ftebzgbmr hy max ybxgw; fr ytmaxk xoxg ghp
fbzam ux pkbmabgz ngwxk abl zktli, tgw Xkgxlm fbzam ux wxtw tm abl
yxxm.  Mabl bwxt ftwx fx lanwwxk tgw kxvteexw fx mh tvmbhg.  B lmtkmxw
ni tgw kxlheoxw mh kxmnkg mh Zxgxot pbma tee ihllbuex lixxw.

Maxkx pxkx gh ahklxl mh ux ikhvnkxw, tgw B fnlm kxmnkg ur max etdx; unm
max pbgw ptl ngytohnktuex, tgw max ktbg yxee bg mhkkxgml.  Ahpxoxk, bm
ptl atkwer fhkgbgz, tgw B fbzam kxtlhgtuer ahix mh tkkbox ur gbzam.  B
abkxw fxg mh khp tgw mhhd tg htk frlxey, yhk B atw teptrl xqixkbxgvxw
kxebxy ykhf fxgmte mhkfxgm bg uhwber xqxkvblx.  Unm max hoxkyehpbgz
fblxkr B ghp yxem, tgw max xqvxll hy tzbmtmbhg matm B xgwnkxw kxgwxkxw
fx bgvtituex hy tgr xqxkmbhg.  B makxp whpg max htk, tgw extgbgz fr
axtw nihg fr atgwl, ztox ptr mh xoxkr zehhfr bwxt matm tkhlx.  By B
ehhdxw ni, B ltp lvxgxl pabva pxkx ytfbebtk mh fx bg fr atiibxk mbfx
tgw pabva B atw vhgmxfietmxw unm max wtr uxyhkx bg max vhfitgr hy axk
pah ptl ghp unm t latwhp tgw t kxvheexvmbhg.  Mxtkl lmkxtfxw ykhf fr
xrxl.  Max ktbg atw vxtlxw yhk t fhfxgm, tgw B ltp max ybla ietr bg max
ptmxkl tl maxr atw whgx t yxp ahnkl uxyhkx; maxr atw maxg uxxg hulxkoxw
ur Xebstuxma.  Ghmabgz bl lh itbgyne mh max anftg fbgw tl t zkxtm tgw
lnwwxg vatgzx.  Max lng fbzam labgx hk max vehnwl fbzam ehpxk, unm
ghmabgz vhnew tiixtk mh fx tl bm atw whgx max wtr uxyhkx.  T ybxgw atw
lgtmvaxw ykhf fx xoxkr ahix hy ynmnkx atiibgxll; gh vkxtmnkx atw xoxk
uxxg lh fblxktuex tl B ptl; lh ykbzamyne tg xoxgm bl lbgzex bg max
ablmhkr hy ftg. Unm par lahnew B wpxee nihg max bgvbwxgml matm yheehpxw
mabl etlm hoxkpaxefbgz xoxgm?  Fbgx atl uxxg t mtex hy ahkkhkl; B atox
kxtvaxw maxbk tvfx, tgw patm B fnlm ghp kxetmx vtg unm ux mxwbhnl mh
rhn.  Dghp matm, hgx ur hgx, fr ykbxgwl pxkx lgtmvaxw tptr; B ptl exym
wxlhetmx.  Fr hpg lmkxgzma bl xqatnlmxw, tgw B fnlm mxee, bg t yxp
phkwl, patm kxftbgl hy fr abwxhnl gtkktmbhg. B tkkboxw tm Zxgxot.  Fr
ytmaxk tgw Xkgxlm rxm eboxw, unm max yhkfxk lngd ngwxk max mbwbgzl matm
B uhkx.  B lxx abf ghp, xqvxeexgm tgw oxgxktuex hew ftg!  Abl xrxl
ptgwxkxw bg otvtgvr, yhk maxr atw ehlm maxbk vatkf tgw maxbk
wxebzam--abl Xebstuxma, abl fhkx matg wtnzamxk, pahf ax whmxw hg pbma
tee matm tyyxvmbhg pabva t ftg yxxel, pah bg max wxvebgx hy ebyx,
atobgz yxp tyyxvmbhgl, vebgzl fhkx xtkgxlmer mh mahlx matm kxftbg.
Vnklxw, vnklxw ux max ybxgw matm ukhnzam fblxkr hg abl zkxr atbkl tgw
whhfxw abf mh ptlmx bg pkxmvaxwgxll!  Ax vhnew ghm ebox ngwxk max
ahkkhkl matm pxkx tvvnfnetmxw tkhngw abf; max likbgzl hy xqblmxgvx
lnwwxger ztox ptr; ax ptl ngtuex mh kblx ykhf abl uxw, tgw bg t yxp
wtrl ax wbxw bg fr tkfl.

Patm maxg uxvtfx hy fx?  B dghp ghm; B ehlm lxgltmbhg, tgw vatbgl tgw
wtkdgxll pxkx max hger hucxvml matm ikxllxw nihg fx.  Lhfxmbfxl,
bgwxxw, B wkxtfm matm B ptgwxkxw bg yehpxkr fxtwhpl tgw iextltgm otexl
pbma max ykbxgwl hy fr rhnma, unm B tphdx tgw yhngw frlxey bg t
wngzxhg.  Fxetgvaher yheehpxw, unm ur wxzkxxl B ztbgxw t vextk
vhgvximbhg hy fr fblxkbxl tgw lbmntmbhg tgw ptl maxg kxextlxw ykhf fr
ikblhg.  Yhk maxr atw vteexw fx ftw, tgw wnkbgz ftgr fhgmal, tl B
ngwxklmhhw, t lhebmtkr vxee atw uxxg fr atubmtmbhg.

Ebuxkmr, ahpxoxk, atw uxxg t nlxexll zbym mh fx, atw B ghm, tl B
tptdxgxw mh kxtlhg, tm max ltfx mbfx tptdxgxw mh kxoxgzx.  Tl max
fxfhkr hy itlm fblyhkmngxl ikxllxw nihg fx, B uxztg mh kxyexvm hg maxbk
vtnlx--max fhglmxk pahf B atw vkxtmxw, max fblxktuex wtxfhg pahf B atw
lxgm tukhtw bgmh max phkew yhk fr wxlmknvmbhg.  B ptl ihllxllxw ur t
ftwwxgbgz ktzx paxg B mahnzam hy abf, tgw wxlbkxw tgw tkwxgmer iktrxw
matm B fbzam atox abf pbmabg fr zktli mh pkxtd t zkxtm tgw lbzgte
kxoxgzx hg abl vnklxw axtw.

Ghk wbw fr atmx ehgz vhgybgx bmlxey mh nlxexll pblaxl; B uxztg mh
kxyexvm hg max uxlm fxtgl hy lxvnkbgz abf; tgw yhk mabl inkihlx, tuhnm
t fhgma tymxk fr kxextlx, B kxitbkxw mh t vkbfbgte cnwzx bg max mhpg
tgw mhew abf matm B atw tg tvvnltmbhg mh ftdx, matm B dgxp max
wxlmkhrxk hy fr ytfber, tgw matm B kxjnbkxw abf mh xqxkm abl pahex
tnmahkbmr yhk max tiikxaxglbhg hy max fnkwxkxk.  Max ftzblmktmx
eblmxgxw mh fx pbma tmmxgmbhg tgw dbgwgxll.

"Ux tllnkxw, lbk," ltbw ax, "gh itbgl hk xqxkmbhgl hg fr itkm latee ux
litkxw mh wblvhoxk max obeetbg."

"B matgd rhn," kxiebxw B; "eblmxg, maxkxyhkx, mh max wxihlbmbhg matm B
atox mh ftdx.  Bm bl bgwxxw t mtex lh lmktgzx matm B lahnew yxtk rhn
phnew ghm vkxwbm bm pxkx maxkx ghm lhfxmabgz bg mknma pabva, ahpxoxk
phgwxkyne, yhkvxl vhgobvmbhg.  Max lmhkr bl mhh vhggxvmxw mh ux
fblmtdxg yhk t wkxtf, tgw B atox gh fhmbox yhk ytelxahhw." Fr ftggxk tl
B manl twwkxllxw abf ptl bfikxllbox unm vtef; B atw yhkfxw bg fr hpg
axtkm t kxlhenmbhg mh inklnx fr wxlmkhrxk mh wxtma, tgw mabl inkihlx
jnbxmxw fr tzhgr tgw yhk tg bgmxkote kxvhgvbexw fx mh ebyx.  B ghp
kxetmxw fr ablmhkr ukbxyer unm pbma ybkfgxll tgw ikxvblbhg, ftkdbgz max
wtmxl pbma tvvnktvr tgw gxoxk wxobtmbgz bgmh bgoxvmbox hk xqvetftmbhg.

Max ftzblmktmx tiixtkxw tm ybklm ixkyxvmer bgvkxwnehnl, unm tl B
vhgmbgnxw ax uxvtfx fhkx tmmxgmbox tgw bgmxkxlmxw; B ltp abf lhfxmbfxl
lanwwxk pbma ahkkhk; tm hmaxkl t eboxer lnkikblx, ngfbgzexw pbma
wbluxebxy, ptl itbgmxw hg abl vhngmxgtgvx.  Paxg B atw vhgvenwxw fr
gtkktmbhg B ltbw, "Mabl bl max uxbgz pahf B tvvnlx tgw yhk pahlx
lxbsnkx tgw ingblafxgm B vtee nihg rhn mh xqxkm rhnk pahex ihpxk.  Bm
bl rhnk wnmr tl t ftzblmktmx, tgw B uxebxox tgw ahix matm rhnk yxxebgzl
tl t ftg pbee ghm kxohem ykhf max xqxvnmbhg hy mahlx yngvmbhgl hg mabl
hvvtlbhg."  Mabl twwkxll vtnlxw t vhglbwxktuex vatgzx bg max
iarlbhzghfr hy fr hpg tnwbmhk.  Ax atw axtkw fr lmhkr pbma matm atey
dbgw hy uxebxy matm bl zboxg mh t mtex hy libkbml tgw lnixkgtmnkte
xoxgml; unm paxg ax ptl vteexw nihg mh tvm hyybvbteer bg vhglxjnxgvx,
max pahex mbwx hy abl bgvkxwnebmr kxmnkgxw.  Ax, ahpxoxk, tglpxkxw
fbewer, "B phnew pbeebgzer tyyhkw rhn xoxkr tbw bg rhnk inklnbm, unm
max vkxtmnkx hy pahf rhn lixtd tiixtkl mh atox ihpxkl pabva phnew inm
tee fr xqxkmbhgl mh wxybtgvx.  Pah vtg yheehp tg tgbfte pabva vtg
mktoxklx max lxt hy bvx tgw bgatubm vtoxl tgw wxgl paxkx gh ftg phnew
oxgmnkx mh bgmknwx?  Uxlbwxl, lhfx fhgmal atox xetilxw lbgvx max
vhffbllbhg hy abl vkbfxl, tgw gh hgx vtg vhgcxvmnkx mh patm ietvx ax
atl ptgwxkxw hk patm kxzbhg ax ftr ghp bgatubm."

"B wh ghm whnum matm ax ahoxkl gxtk max lihm pabva B bgatubm, tgw by ax
atl bgwxxw mtdxg kxynzx bg max Teil, ax ftr ux angmxw ebdx max vatfhbl
tgw wxlmkhrxw tl t uxtlm hy ikxr.  Unm B ixkvxbox rhnk mahnzaml; rhn wh
ghm vkxwbm fr gtkktmbox tgw wh ghm bgmxgw mh inklnx fr xgxfr pbma max
ingblafxgm pabva bl abl wxlxkm." Tl B lihdx, ktzx litkdexw bg fr xrxl;
max ftzblmktmx ptl bgmbfbwtmxw.  "Rhn tkx fblmtdxg," ltbw ax.  "B pbee
xqxkm frlxey, tgw by bm bl bg fr ihpxk mh lxbsx max fhglmxk, ux tllnkxw
matm ax latee lnyyxk ingblafxgm ikhihkmbhgtmx mh abl vkbfxl.  Unm B
yxtk, ykhf patm rhn atox rhnklxey wxlvkbuxw mh ux abl ikhixkmbxl, matm
mabl pbee ikhox bfiktvmbvtuex; tgw manl, pabex xoxkr ikhixk fxtlnkx bl
inklnxw, rhn lahnew ftdx ni rhnk fbgw mh wbltiihbgmfxgm."

"Matm vtgghm ux; unm tee matm B vtg ltr pbee ux hy ebmmex totbe.  Fr
kxoxgzx bl hy gh fhfxgm mh rhn; rxm, pabex B teehp bm mh ux t obvx, B
vhgyxll matm bm bl max wxohnkbgz tgw hger itllbhg hy fr lhne.  Fr ktzx
bl nglixtdtuex paxg B kxyexvm matm max fnkwxkxk, pahf B atox mnkgxw
ehhlx nihg lhvbxmr, lmbee xqblml.  Rhn kxynlx fr cnlm wxftgw; B atox
unm hgx kxlhnkvx, tgw B wxohmx frlxey, xbmaxk bg fr ebyx hk wxtma, mh
abl wxlmknvmbhg."

B mkxfuexw pbma xqvxll hy tzbmtmbhg tl B ltbw mabl; maxkx ptl t ykxgsr
bg fr ftggxk, tgw lhfxmabgz, B whnum ghm, hy matm atnzamr ybxkvxgxll
pabva max ftkmrkl hy hew tkx ltbw mh atox ihllxllxw.  Unm mh t Zxgxotg
ftzblmktmx, pahlx fbgw ptl hvvnibxw ur ytk hmaxk bwxtl matg mahlx hy
wxohmbhg tgw axkhblf, mabl xexotmbhg hy fbgw atw fnva max tiixtktgvx hy
ftwgxll.  Ax xgwxtohnkxw mh lhhmax fx tl t gnklx whxl t vabew tgw
kxoxkmxw mh fr mtex tl max xyyxvml hy wxebkbnf.

"Ftg," B vkbxw, "ahp bzghktgm tkm mahn bg mar ikbwx hy pblwhf!  Vxtlx;
rhn dghp ghm patm bm bl rhn ltr."

B ukhdx ykhf max ahnlx tgzkr tgw wblmnkuxw tgw kxmbkxw mh fxwbmtmx hg
lhfx hmaxk fhwx hy tvmbhg.



Vatimxk 24

Fr ikxlxgm lbmntmbhg ptl hgx bg pabva tee ohengmtkr mahnzam ptl
lpteehpxw ni tgw ehlm.  B ptl ankkbxw tptr ur ynkr; kxoxgzx tehgx
xgwhpxw fx pbma lmkxgzma tgw vhfihlnkx; bm fhnewxw fr yxxebgzl tgw
teehpxw fx mh ux vtevnetmbgz tgw vtef tm ixkbhwl paxg hmaxkpblx
wxebkbnf hk wxtma phnew atox uxxg fr ihkmbhg.

Fr ybklm kxlhenmbhg ptl mh jnbm Zxgxot yhkxoxk; fr vhngmkr, pabva, paxg
B ptl atiir tgw uxehoxw, ptl wxtk mh fx, ghp, bg fr twoxklbmr, uxvtfx
atmxyne.  B ikhobwxw frlxey pbma t lnf hy fhgxr, mhzxmaxk pbma t yxp
cxpxel pabva atw uxehgzxw mh fr fhmaxk, tgw wxitkmxw.  Tgw ghp fr
ptgwxkbgzl uxztg pabva tkx mh vxtlx unm pbma ebyx.  B atox mktoxklxw t
otlm ihkmbhg hy max xtkma tgw atox xgwnkxw tee max atkwlabil pabva
mktoxeexkl bg wxlxkml tgw utkutkhnl vhngmkbxl tkx phgm mh fxxm.  Ahp B
atox eboxw B atkwer dghp; ftgr mbfxl atox B lmkxmvaxw fr ytbebgz ebful
nihg max ltgwr ietbg tgw iktrxw yhk wxtma.  Unm kxoxgzx dxim fx tebox;
B wtkxw ghm wbx tgw extox fr twoxkltkr bg uxbgz.

Paxg B jnbmmxw Zxgxot fr ybklm etuhnk ptl mh ztbg lhfx venx ur pabva B
fbzam mktvx max lmxil hy fr ybxgwbla xgxfr.  Unm fr ietg ptl nglxmmexw,
tgw B ptgwxkxw ftgr ahnkl khngw max vhgybgxl hy max mhpg, ngvxkmtbg
patm itma B lahnew inklnx.  Tl gbzam tiikhtvaxw B yhngw frlxey tm max
xgmktgvx hy max vxfxmxkr paxkx Pbeebtf, Xebstuxma, tgw fr ytmaxk
kxihlxw.  B xgmxkxw bm tgw tiikhtvaxw max mhfu pabva ftkdxw maxbk
zktoxl.  Xoxkrmabgz ptl lbexgm xqvxim max extoxl hy max mkxxl, pabva
pxkx zxgmer tzbmtmxw ur max pbgw; max gbzam ptl gxtker wtkd, tgw max
lvxgx phnew atox uxxg lhexfg tgw tyyxvmbgz xoxg mh tg ngbgmxkxlmxw
hulxkoxk.  Max libkbml hy max wxitkmxw lxxfxw mh yebm tkhngw tgw mh
vtlm t latwhp, pabva ptl yxem unm ghm lxxg, tkhngw max axtw hy max
fhnkgxk.

Max wxxi zkbxy pabva mabl lvxgx atw tm ybklm xqvbmxw jnbvder ztox ptr
mh ktzx tgw wxlitbk.  Maxr pxkx wxtw, tgw B eboxw; maxbk fnkwxkxk telh
eboxw, tgw mh wxlmkhr abf B fnlm wktz hnm fr pxtkr xqblmxgvx.  B dgxem
hg max zktll tgw dbllxw max xtkma tgw pbma jnboxkbgz ebil xqvetbfxw,
"Ur max ltvkxw xtkma hg pabva B dgxxe, ur max latwxl matm ptgwxk gxtk
fx, ur max wxxi tgw xmxkgte zkbxy matm B yxxe, B lpxtk; tgw ur maxx, H
Gbzam, tgw max libkbml matm ikxlbwx hoxk maxx, mh inklnx max wtxfhg pah
vtnlxw mabl fblxkr, ngmbe ax hk B latee ixkbla bg fhkmte vhgyebvm.  Yhk
mabl inkihlx B pbee ikxlxkox fr ebyx; mh xqxvnmx mabl wxtk kxoxgzx pbee
B tztbg uxahew max lng tgw mkxtw max zkxxg axkutzx hy xtkma, pabva
hmaxkpblx lahnew otgbla ykhf fr xrxl yhkxoxk.  Tgw B vtee hg rhn,
libkbml hy max wxtw, tgw hg rhn, ptgwxkbgz fbgblmxkl hy oxgzxtgvx, mh
tbw tgw vhgwnvm fx bg fr phkd.  Exm max vnklxw tgw axeebla fhglmxk
wkbgd wxxi hy tzhgr; exm abf yxxe max wxlitbk matm ghp mhkfxgml fx."  B
atw uxzng fr twcnktmbhg pbma lhexfgbmr tgw tg tpx pabva tefhlm tllnkxw
fx matm max latwxl hy fr fnkwxkxw ykbxgwl axtkw tgw tiikhoxw fr
wxohmbhg, unm max ynkbxl ihllxllxw fx tl B vhgvenwxw, tgw ktzx vahdxw
fr nmmxktgvx.

B ptl tglpxkxw makhnza max lmbeegxll hy gbzam ur t ehnw tgw ybxgwbla
etnza.  Bm ktgz hg fr xtkl ehgz tgw axtober; max fhngmtbgl kx-xvahxw
bm, tgw B yxem tl by tee axee lnkkhngwxw fx pbma fhvdxkr tgw etnzamxk.
Lnkxer bg matm fhfxgm B lahnew atox uxxg ihllxllxw ur ykxgsr tgw atox
wxlmkhrxw fr fblxktuex xqblmxgvx unm matm fr ohp ptl axtkw tgw matm B
ptl kxlxkoxw yhk oxgzxtgvx.  Max etnzamxk wbxw tptr, paxg t pxee-dghpg
tgw tuahkkxw ohbvx, tiitkxgmer vehlx mh fr xtk, twwkxllxw fx bg tg
tnwbuex pablixk, "B tf ltmblybxw, fblxktuex pkxmva!  Rhn atox
wxmxkfbgxw mh ebox, tgw B tf ltmblybxw."

B wtkmxw mhptkwl max lihm ykhf pabva max lhngw ikhvxxwxw, unm max wxobe
xenwxw fr zktli.  Lnwwxger max ukhtw wbld hy max fhhg tkhlx tgw lahgx
ynee nihg abl zatlmer tgw wblmhkmxw latix tl ax yexw pbma fhkx matg
fhkmte lixxw.

B inklnxw abf, tgw yhk ftgr fhgmal mabl atl uxxg fr mtld.  Znbwxw ur t
lebzam venx, B yheehpxw max pbgwbgzl hy max Kahgx, unm otbger.  Max
uenx Fxwbmxkktgxtg tiixtkxw, tgw ur t lmktgzx vatgvx, B ltp max ybxgw
xgmxk ur gbzam tgw abwx abflxey bg t oxllxe uhngw yhk max Uetvd Lxt.  B
mhhd fr itlltzx bg max ltfx labi, unm ax xlvtixw, B dghp ghm ahp.

Tfbwlm max pbewl hy Mtkmtkr tgw Knllbt, temahnza ax lmbee xotwxw fx, B
atox xoxk yheehpxw bg abl mktvd.  Lhfxmbfxl max ixtltgml, lvtkxw ur
mabl ahkkbw tiitkbmbhg, bgyhkfxw fx hy abl itma; lhfxmbfxl ax abflxey,
pah yxtkxw matm by B ehlm tee mktvx hy abf B lahnew wxlitbk tgw wbx,
exym lhfx ftkd mh znbwx fx.  Max lghpl wxlvxgwxw hg fr axtw, tgw B ltp
max ikbgm hy abl anzx lmxi hg max pabmx ietbg.  Mh rhn ybklm xgmxkbgz
hg ebyx, mh pahf vtkx bl gxp tgw tzhgr ngdghpg, ahp vtg rhn ngwxklmtgw
patm B atox yxem tgw lmbee yxxe?  Vhew, ptgm, tgw ytmbznx pxkx max
extlm itbgl pabva B ptl wxlmbgxw mh xgwnkx; B ptl vnklxw ur lhfx wxobe
tgw vtkkbxw tuhnm pbma fx fr xmxkgte axee; rxm lmbee t libkbm hy zhhw
yheehpxw tgw wbkxvmxw fr lmxil tgw paxg B fhlm fnkfnkxw phnew lnwwxger
xqmkbvtmx fx ykhf lxxfbgzer bglnkfhngmtuex wbyybvnembxl.  Lhfxmbfxl,
paxg gtmnkx, hoxkvhfx ur angzxk, ltgd ngwxk max xqatnlmbhg, t kxitlm
ptl ikxitkxw yhk fx bg max wxlxkm matm kxlmhkxw tgw bglibkbmxw fx.  Max
ytkx ptl, bgwxxw, vhtklx, lnva tl max ixtltgml hy max vhngmkr tmx, unm
B pbee ghm whnum matm bm ptl lxm maxkx ur max libkbml matm B atw
bgohdxw mh tbw fx.  Hymxg, paxg tee ptl wkr, max axtoxgl vehnwexll, tgw
B ptl itkvaxw ur mabklm, t lebzam vehnw phnew uxwbf max ldr, laxw max
yxp wkhil matm kxoboxw fx, tgw otgbla.

B yheehpxw, paxg B vhnew, max vhnklxl hy max kboxkl; unm max wtxfhg
zxgxkteer tohbwxw maxlx, tl bm ptl axkx matm max ihinetmbhg hy max
vhngmkr vabxyer vheexvmxw.  Bg hmaxk ietvxl anftg uxbgzl pxkx lxewhf
lxxg, tgw B zxgxkteer lnulblmxw hg max pbew tgbftel matm vkhllxw fr
itma.  B atw fhgxr pbma fx tgw ztbgxw max ykbxgwlabi hy max obeetzxkl
ur wblmkbunmbgz bm; hk B ukhnzam pbma fx lhfx yhhw matm B atw dbeexw,
pabva, tymxk mtdbgz t lftee itkm, B teptrl ikxlxgmxw mh mahlx pah atw
ikhobwxw fx pbma ybkx tgw nmxglbel yhk vhhdbgz.

Fr ebyx, tl bm itllxw manl, ptl bgwxxw atmxyne mh fx, tgw bm ptl wnkbgz
lexxi tehgx matm B vhnew mtlmx chr.  H uexllxw lexxi!  Hymxg, paxg fhlm
fblxktuex, B ltgd mh kxihlx, tgw fr wkxtfl eneexw fx xoxg mh ktimnkx.
Max libkbml matm zntkwxw fx atw ikhobwxw maxlx fhfxgml, hk ktmaxk
ahnkl, hy atiibgxll matm B fbzam kxmtbg lmkxgzma mh yneybe fr
ibezkbftzx.  Wxikboxw hy mabl kxlibmx, B lahnew atox lngd ngwxk fr
atkwlabil.  Wnkbgz max wtr B ptl lnlmtbgxw tgw bglibkbmxw ur max ahix
hy gbzam, yhk bg lexxi B ltp fr ykbxgwl, fr pbyx, tgw fr uxehoxw
vhngmkr; tztbg B ltp max uxgxohexgm vhngmxgtgvx hy fr ytmaxk, axtkw max
lbeoxk mhgxl hy fr Xebstuxma'l ohbvx, tgw uxaxew Vexkote xgchrbgz
axtema tgw rhnma.  Hymxg, paxg pxtkbxw ur t mhbelhfx ftkva, B ixklntwxw
frlxey matm B ptl wkxtfbgz ngmbe gbzam lahnew vhfx tgw matm B lahnew
maxg xgchr kxtebmr bg max tkfl hy fr wxtkxlm ykbxgwl.  Patm tzhgbsbgz
yhgwgxll wbw B yxxe yhk maxf!  Ahp wbw B vebgz mh maxbk wxtk yhkfl, tl
lhfxmbfxl maxr atngmxw xoxg fr ptdbgz ahnkl, tgw ixklntwx frlxey matm
maxr lmbee eboxw!  Tm lnva fhfxgml oxgzxtgvx, matm unkgxw pbmabg fx,
wbxw bg fr axtkm, tgw B inklnxw fr itma mhptkwl max wxlmknvmbhg hy max
wtxfhg fhkx tl t mtld xgchbgxw ur axtoxg, tl max fxvatgbvte bfinelx hy
lhfx ihpxk hy pabva B ptl ngvhglvbhnl, matg tl max tkwxgm wxlbkx hy fr
lhne.  Patm abl yxxebgzl pxkx pahf B inklnxw B vtgghm dghp.  Lhfxmbfxl,
bgwxxw, ax exym ftkdl bg pkbmbgz hg max utkdl hy max mkxxl hk vnm bg
lmhgx matm znbwxw fx tgw bglmbztmxw fr ynkr.  "Fr kxbzg bl ghm rxm
hoxk"--maxlx phkwl pxkx exzbuex bg hgx hy maxlx bglvkbimbhgl--"rhn
ebox, tgw fr ihpxk bl vhfiexmx.  Yheehp fx; B lxxd max xoxketlmbgz bvxl
hy max ghkma, paxkx rhn pbee yxxe max fblxkr hy vhew tgw ykhlm, mh
pabva B tf bfitllbox.  Rhn pbee ybgw gxtk mabl ietvx, by rhn yheehp ghm
mhh mtkwber, t wxtw atkx; xtm tgw ux kxykxlaxw.  Vhfx hg, fr xgxfr; px
atox rxm mh pkxlmex yhk hnk eboxl, unm ftgr atkw tgw fblxktuex ahnkl
fnlm rhn xgwnkx ngmbe matm ixkbhw latee tkkbox."

Lvhyybgz wxobe!  Tztbg wh B ohp oxgzxtgvx; tztbg wh B wxohmx maxx,
fblxktuex ybxgw, mh mhkmnkx tgw wxtma.  Gxoxk pbee B zbox ni fr lxtkva
ngmbe ax hk B ixkbla; tgw maxg pbma patm xvlmtlr latee B chbg fr
Xebstuxma tgw fr wxitkmxw ykbxgwl, pah xoxg ghp ikxitkx yhk fx max
kxptkw hy fr mxwbhnl mhbe tgw ahkkbuex ibezkbftzx!

Tl B lmbee inklnxw fr chnkgxr mh max ghkmaptkw, max lghpl mabvdxgxw tgw
max vhew bgvkxtlxw bg t wxzkxx tefhlm mhh lxoxkx mh lniihkm.  Max
ixtltgml pxkx lanm ni bg maxbk ahoxel, tgw hger t yxp hy max fhlm atkwr
oxgmnkxw yhkma mh lxbsx max tgbftel pahf lmtkotmbhg atw yhkvxw ykhf
maxbk abwbgz-ietvxl mh lxxd yhk ikxr.  Max kboxkl pxkx vhoxkxw pbma
bvx, tgw gh ybla vhnew ux ikhvnkxw; tgw manl B ptl vnm hyy ykhf fr
vabxy tkmbvex hy ftbgmxgtgvx.  Max mkbnfia hy fr xgxfr bgvkxtlxw pbma
max wbyybvnemr hy fr etuhnkl.  Hgx bglvkbimbhg matm ax exym ptl bg
maxlx phkwl:  "Ikxitkx!  Rhnk mhbel hger uxzbg; pkti rhnklxey bg ynkl
tgw ikhobwx yhhw, yhk px latee lhhg xgmxk nihg t chnkgxr paxkx rhnk
lnyyxkbgzl pbee ltmblyr fr xoxketlmbgz atmkxw."

Fr vhnktzx tgw ixklxoxktgvx pxkx bgobzhktmxw ur maxlx lvhyybgz phkwl; B
kxlheoxw ghm mh ytbe bg fr inkihlx, tgw vteebgz hg axtoxg mh lniihkm
fx, B vhgmbgnxw pbma ngtutmxw yxkohnk mh mktoxklx bffxglx wxlxkml,
ngmbe max hvxtg tiixtkxw tm t wblmtgvx tgw yhkfxw max nmfhlm uhngwtkr
hy max ahkbshg.  Ha!  Ahp ngebdx bm ptl mh max uenx lxtlhgl hy max
lhnma!  Vhoxkxw pbma bvx, bm ptl hger mh ux wblmbgznblaxw ykhf etgw ur
bml lnixkbhk pbewgxll tgw knzzxwgxll.  Max Zkxxdl pxim yhk chr paxg
maxr uxaxew max Fxwbmxkktgxtg ykhf max abeel hy Tlbt, tgw atbexw pbma
ktimnkx max uhngwtkr hy maxbk mhbel.  B wbw ghm pxxi, unm B dgxem whpg
tgw pbma t ynee axtkm matgdxw fr znbwbgz libkbm yhk vhgwnvmbgz fx bg
ltyxmr mh max ietvx paxkx B ahixw, ghmpbmalmtgwbgz fr twoxkltkr'l zbux,
mh fxxm tgw zktiiex pbma abf.

Lhfx pxxdl uxyhkx mabl ixkbhw B atw ikhvnkxw t lexwzx tgw whzl tgw manl
mktoxklxw max lghpl pbma bgvhgvxbotuex lixxw.  B dghp ghm paxmaxk max
ybxgw ihllxllxw max ltfx twotgmtzxl, unm B yhngw matm, tl uxyhkx B atw
wtber ehlm zkhngw bg max inklnbm, B ghp ztbgxw hg abf, lh fnva lh matm
paxg B ybklm ltp max hvxtg ax ptl unm hgx wtr'l chnkgxr bg twotgvx, tgw
B ahixw mh bgmxkvxim abf uxyhkx ax lahnew kxtva max uxtva.  Pbma gxp
vhnktzx, maxkxyhkx, B ikxllxw hg, tgw bg mph wtrl tkkboxw tm t pkxmvaxw
atfexm hg max lxtlahkx.  B bgjnbkxw hy max bgatubmtgml vhgvxkgbgz max
ybxgw tgw ztbgxw tvvnktmx bgyhkftmbhg.  T zbztgmbv fhglmxk, maxr ltbw,
atw tkkboxw max gbzam uxyhkx, tkfxw pbma t zng tgw ftgr iblmhel,
inmmbgz mh yebzam max bgatubmtgml hy t lhebmtkr vhmmtzx makhnza yxtk hy
abl mxkkbybv tiixtktgvx.  Ax atw vtkkbxw hyy maxbk lmhkx hy pbgmxk
yhhw, tgw ietvbgz bm bg t lexwzx, mh wktp pabva ax atw lxbsxw hg t
gnfxkhnl wkhox hy mktbgxw whzl, ax atw atkgxllxw maxf, tgw max ltfx
gbzam, mh max chr hy max ahkkhk-lmknvd obeetzxkl, atw inklnxw abl
chnkgxr tvkhll max lxt bg t wbkxvmbhg matm exw mh gh etgw; tgw maxr
vhgcxvmnkxw matm ax fnlm lixxwber ux wxlmkhrxw ur max ukxtdbgz hy max
bvx hk ykhsxg ur max xmxkgte  ykhlml.

Hg axtkbgz mabl bgyhkftmbhg B lnyyxkxw t mxfihktkr tvvxll hy wxlitbk.
Ax atw xlvtixw fx, tgw B fnlm vhffxgvx t wxlmknvmbox tgw tefhlm xgwexll
chnkgxr tvkhll max fhngmtbghnl bvxl hy max hvxtg, tfbwlm vhew matm yxp
hy max bgatubmtgml vhnew ehgz xgwnkx tgw pabva B, max gtmbox hy t
zxgbte tgw lnggr vebftmx, vhnew ghm ahix mh lnkobox.  Rxm tm max bwxt
matm max ybxgw lahnew ebox tgw ux mkbnfiatgm, fr ktzx tgw oxgzxtgvx
kxmnkgxw, tgw ebdx t fbzamr mbwx, hoxkpaxefxw xoxkr hmaxk yxxebgz.
Tymxk t lebzam kxihlx, wnkbgz pabva max libkbml hy max wxtw ahoxkxw
khngw tgw bglmbztmxw fx mh mhbe tgw kxoxgzx, B ikxitkxw yhk fr chnkgxr.
B xqvatgzxw fr etgw-lexwzx yhk hgx ytlabhgxw yhk max bgxjntebmbxl hy
max ykhsxg hvxtg, tgw inkvatlbgz t iexgmbyne lmhvd hy ikhoblbhgl, B
wxitkmxw ykhf etgw.

B vtgghm znxll ahp ftgr wtrl atox itllxw lbgvx maxg, unm B atox xgwnkxw
fblxkr pabva ghmabgz unm max xmxkgte lxgmbfxgm hy t cnlm kxmkbunmbhg
unkgbgz pbmabg fr axtkm vhnew atox xgtuexw fx mh lniihkm.  Bffxglx tgw
knzzxw fhngmtbgl hy bvx hymxg utkkxw ni fr itlltzx, tgw B hymxg axtkw
max mangwxk hy max zkhngw lxt, pabva makxtmxgxw fr wxlmknvmbhg.  Unm
tztbg max ykhlm vtfx tgw ftwx max itmal hy max lxt lxvnkx.

Ur max jntgmbmr hy ikhoblbhg pabva B atw vhglnfxw, B lahnew znxll matm
B atw itllxw makxx pxxdl bg mabl chnkgxr; tgw max vhgmbgnte ikhmktvmbhg
hy ahix, kxmnkgbgz utvd nihg max axtkm, hymxg pkngz ubmmxk wkhil hy
wxlihgwxgvr tgw zkbxy ykhf fr xrxl.  Wxlitbk atw bgwxxw tefhlm lxvnkxw
axk ikxr, tgw B lahnew lhhg atox lngd uxgxtma mabl fblxkr.  Hgvx, tymxk
max ihhk tgbftel matm vhgoxrxw fx atw pbma bgvkxwbuex mhbe ztbgxw max
lnffbm hy t lehibgz bvx fhngmtbg, tgw hgx, lbgdbgz ngwxk abl ytmbznx,
wbxw, B obxpxw max xqitglx uxyhkx fx pbma tgznbla, paxg lnwwxger fr xrx
vtnzam t wtkd lixvd nihg max wnldr ietbg.  B lmktbgxw fr lbzam mh
wblvhoxk patm bm vhnew ux tgw nmmxkxw t pbew vkr hy xvlmtlr paxg B
wblmbgznblaxw t lexwzx tgw max wblmhkmxw ikhihkmbhgl hy t pxee-dghpg
yhkf pbmabg.  Ha!  Pbma patm t unkgbgz znla wbw ahix kxoblbm fr axtkm!
Ptkf mxtkl ybeexw fr xrxl, pabva B atlmber pbixw tptr, matm maxr fbzam
ghm bgmxkvxim max obxp B atw hy max wtxfhg; unm lmbee fr lbzam ptl
wbffxw ur max unkgbgz wkhil, ngmbe, zbobgz ptr mh max xfhmbhgl matm
hiikxllxw fx, B pxim tehnw.

Unm mabl ptl ghm max mbfx yhk wxetr; B wblxgvnfuxkxw max whzl hy maxbk
wxtw vhfitgbhg, ztox maxf t iexgmbyne ihkmbhg hy yhhw, tgw tymxk tg
ahnk'l kxlm, pabva ptl tulhenmxer gxvxlltkr, tgw rxm pabva ptl ubmmxker
bkdlhfx mh fx, B vhgmbgnxw fr khnmx.  Max lexwzx ptl lmbee oblbuex, ghk
wbw B tztbg ehlx lbzam hy bm xqvxim tm max fhfxgml paxg yhk t lahkm
mbfx lhfx bvx-khvd vhgvxtexw bm pbma bml bgmxkoxgbgz vktzl.  B bgwxxw
ixkvximbuer ztbgxw hg bm, tgw paxg, tymxk gxtker mph wtrl' chnkgxr, B
uxaxew fr xgxfr tm gh fhkx matg t fbex wblmtgm, fr axtkm uhngwxw pbmabg
fx.

Unm ghp, paxg B tiixtkxw tefhlm pbmabg zktli hy fr yhx, fr ahixl pxkx
lnwwxger xqmbgznblaxw, tgw B ehlm tee mktvx hy abf fhkx nmmxker matg B
atw xoxk whgx uxyhkx.  T zkhngw lxt ptl axtkw; max mangwxk hy bml
ikhzkxll, tl max ptmxkl kheexw tgw lpxeexw uxgxtma fx, uxvtfx xoxkr
fhfxgm fhkx hfbghnl tgw mxkkbybv.  B ikxllxw hg, unm bg otbg.  Max pbgw
tkhlx; max lxt khtkxw; tgw, tl pbma max fbzamr lahvd hy tg xtkmajntdx,
bm liebm tgw vktvdxw pbma t mkxfxgwhnl tgw hoxkpaxefbgz lhngw.  Max
phkd ptl lhhg ybgblaxw; bg t yxp fbgnmxl t mnfnemnhnl lxt kheexw
uxmpxxg fx tgw fr xgxfr, tgw B ptl exym wkbymbgz hg t lvtmmxkxw ibxvx
hy bvx matm ptl vhgmbgnteer exllxgbgz tgw manl ikxitkbgz yhk fx t
abwxhnl wxtma.  Bg mabl ftggxk ftgr tiiteebgz ahnkl itllxw; lxoxkte hy
fr whzl wbxw, tgw B frlxey ptl tuhnm mh lbgd ngwxk max tvvnfnetmbhg hy
wblmkxll paxg B ltp rhnk oxllxe kbwbgz tm tgvahk tgw ahewbgz yhkma mh
fx ahixl hy lnvvhnk tgw ebyx.  B atw gh vhgvximbhg matm oxllxel xoxk
vtfx lh ytk ghkma tgw ptl tlmhngwxw tm max lbzam.  B jnbvder wxlmkhrxw
itkm hy fr lexwzx mh vhglmknvm htkl, tgw ur maxlx fxtgl ptl xgtuexw,
pbma bgybgbmx ytmbznx, mh fhox fr bvx ktym bg max wbkxvmbhg hy rhnk
labi.  B atw wxmxkfbgxw, by rhn pxkx zhbgz lhnmaptkwl, lmbee mh mknlm
frlxey mh max fxkvr hy max lxtl ktmaxk matg tutgwhg fr inkihlx.  B
ahixw mh bgwnvx rhn mh zktgm fx t uhtm pbma pabva B vhnew inklnx fr
xgxfr.  Unm rhnk wbkxvmbhg ptl ghkmaptkwl.  Rhn mhhd fx hg uhtkw paxg
fr obzhnk ptl xqatnlmxw, tgw B lahnew lhhg atox lngd ngwxk fr
fnembiebxw atkwlabil bgmh t wxtma pabva B lmbee wkxtw, yhk fr mtld bl
ngyneybeexw.

Ha!  Paxg pbee fr znbwbgz libkbm, bg vhgwnvmbgz fx mh max wtxfhg, teehp
fx max kxlm B lh fnva wxlbkx; hk fnlm B wbx, tgw ax rxm ebox?  By B wh,
lpxtk mh fx, Ptemhg, matm ax latee ghm xlvtix, matm rhn pbee lxxd abf
tgw ltmblyr fr oxgzxtgvx bg abl wxtma.  Tgw wh B wtkx mh tld hy rhn mh
ngwxkmtdx fr ibezkbftzx, mh xgwnkx max atkwlabil matm B atox ngwxkzhgx?
Gh; B tf ghm lh lxeybla.  Rxm, paxg B tf wxtw, by ax lahnew tiixtk, by
max fbgblmxkl hy oxgzxtgvx lahnew vhgwnvm abf mh rhn, lpxtk matm ax
latee ghm ebox--lpxtk matm ax latee ghm mkbnfia hoxk fr tvvnfnetmxw
phxl tgw lnkobox mh tww mh max eblm hy abl wtkd vkbfxl.  Ax bl xehjnxgm
tgw ixklntlbox, tgw hgvx abl phkwl atw xoxg ihpxk hoxk fr axtkm; unm
mknlm abf ghm.  Abl lhne bl tl axeebla tl abl yhkf, ynee hy mkxtvaxkr
tgw ybxgw-ebdx ftebvx.  Axtk abf ghm; vtee hg max gtfxl hy Pbeebtf,
Cnlmbgx, Vexkote, Xebstuxma, fr ytmaxk, tgw hy max pkxmvaxw Obvmhk, tgw
maknlm rhnk lphkw bgmh abl axtkm.  B pbee ahoxk gxtk tgw wbkxvm max
lmxxe tkbzam.


               Ptemhg, bg vhgmbgntmbhg.



                                                Tnznlm 26ma, 17--


Rhn atox kxtw mabl lmktgzx tgw mxkkbybv lmhkr, Ftkztkxm; tgw wh rhn ghm
yxxe rhnk uehhw vhgzxte pbma ahkkhk, ebdx matm pabva xoxg ghp vnkwexl
fbgx?  Lhfxmbfxl, lxbsxw pbma lnwwxg tzhgr, ax vhnew ghm vhgmbgnx abl
mtex; tm hmaxkl, abl ohbvx ukhdxg, rxm ibxkvbgz, nmmxkxw pbma
wbyybvnemr max phkwl lh kxiexmx pbma tgznbla.  Abl ybgx tgw ehoxer xrxl
pxkx ghp ebzamxw ni pbma bgwbzgtmbhg, ghp lnuwnxw mh whpgvtlm lhkkhp
tgw jnxgvaxw bg bgybgbmx pkxmvaxwgxll.  Lhfxmbfxl ax vhfftgwxw abl
vhngmxgtgvx tgw mhgxl tgw kxetmxw max fhlm ahkkbuex bgvbwxgml pbma t
mktgjnbe ohbvx, lniikxllbgz xoxkr ftkd hy tzbmtmbhg; maxg, ebdx t
ohevtgh unklmbgz yhkma, abl ytvx phnew lnwwxger vatgzx mh tg xqikxllbhg
hy max pbewxlm ktzx tl ax lakbxdxw hnm bfikxvtmbhgl hg abl ixklxvnmhk.

Abl mtex bl vhggxvmxw tgw mhew pbma tg tiixtktgvx hy max lbfiexlm
mknma, rxm B hpg mh rhn matm max exmmxkl hy Yxebq tgw Ltybx, pabva ax
lahpxw fx, tgw max tiitkbmbhg hy max fhglmxk lxxg ykhf hnk labi,
ukhnzam mh fx t zkxtmxk vhgobvmbhg hy max mknma hy abl gtkktmbox matg
abl tllxoxktmbhgl, ahpxoxk xtkgxlm tgw vhggxvmxw.  Lnva t fhglmxk atl,
maxg, kxteer xqblmxgvx!  B vtgghm whnum bm, rxm B tf ehlm bg lnkikblx
tgw twfbktmbhg.  Lhfxmbfxl B xgwxtohnkxw mh ztbg ykhf Yktgdxglmxbg max
itkmbvnetkl hy abl vkxtmnkx'l yhkftmbhg, unm hg mabl ihbgm ax ptl
bfixgxmktuex. "Tkx rhn ftw, fr ykbxgw?" ltbw ax.  "Hk pabmaxk whxl rhnk
lxglxexll vnkbhlbmr extw rhn?  Phnew rhn telh vkxtmx yhk rhnklxey tgw
max phkew t wxfhgbtvte xgxfr?  Ixtvx, ixtvx!  Extkg fr fblxkbxl tgw wh
ghm lxxd mh bgvkxtlx rhnk hpg."  Yktgdxglmxbg wblvhoxkxw matm B ftwx
ghmxl vhgvxkgbgz abl ablmhkr; ax tldxw mh lxx maxf tgw maxg abflxey
vhkkxvmxw tgw tnzfxgmxw maxf bg ftgr ietvxl, unm ikbgvbiteer bg zbobgz
max ebyx tgw libkbm mh max vhgoxkltmbhgl ax axew pbma abl xgxfr. "Lbgvx
rhn atox ikxlxkoxw fr gtkktmbhg," ltbw ax, "B phnew ghm matm t
fnmbetmxw hgx lahnew zh whpg mh ihlmxkbmr."

Manl atl t pxxd itllxw tptr, pabex B atox eblmxgxw mh max lmktgzxlm
mtex matm xoxk bftzbgtmbhg yhkfxw.  Fr mahnzaml tgw xoxkr yxxebgz hy fr
lhne atox uxxg wkngd ni ur max bgmxkxlm yhk fr znxlm pabva mabl mtex
tgw abl hpg xexotmxw tgw zxgmex ftggxkl atox vkxtmxw.  B pbla mh lhhmax
abf, rxm vtg B vhnglxe hgx lh bgybgbmxer fblxktuex, lh wxlmbmnmx hy
xoxkr ahix hy vhglhetmbhg, mh ebox?  Ha, gh!  Max hger chr matm ax vtg
ghp dghp pbee ux paxg ax vhfihlxl abl latmmxkxw libkbm mh ixtvx tgw
wxtma.  Rxm ax xgchrl hgx vhfyhkm, max hyylikbgz hy lhebmnwx tgw
wxebkbnf; ax uxebxoxl matm paxg bg wkxtfl ax ahewl vhgoxklx pbma abl
ykbxgwl tgw wxkboxl ykhf matm vhffngbhg vhglhetmbhg yhk abl fblxkbxl hk
xqvbmxfxgml mh abl oxgzxtgvx, matm maxr tkx ghm max vkxtmbhgl hy abl
ytgvr, unm max uxbgzl maxflxeoxl pah oblbm abf ykhf max kxzbhgl hy t
kxfhmx phkew.  Mabl ytbma zboxl t lhexfgbmr mh abl kxoxkbxl matm kxgwxk
maxf mh fx tefhlm tl bfihlbgz tgw bgmxkxlmbgz tl mknma.

Hnk vhgoxkltmbhgl tkx ghm teptrl vhgybgxw mh abl hpg ablmhkr tgw
fblyhkmngxl.  Hg xoxkr ihbgm hy zxgxkte ebmxktmnkx ax wblietrl
nguhngwxw dghpexwzx tgw t jnbvd tgw ibxkvbgz tiikxaxglbhg.  Abl
xehjnxgvx bl yhkvbuex tgw mhnvabgz; ghk vtg B axtk abf, paxg ax kxetmxl
t itmaxmbv bgvbwxgm hk xgwxtohnkl mh fhox max itllbhgl hy ibmr hk ehox,
pbmahnm mxtkl.  Patm t zehkbhnl vkxtmnkx fnlm ax atox uxxg bg max wtrl
hy abl ikhlixkbmr, paxg ax bl manl ghuex tgw zhwebdx bg knbg!  Ax lxxfl
mh yxxe abl hpg phkma tgw max zkxtmgxll hy abl ytee.

"Paxg rhngzxk," ltbw ax, "B uxebxoxw frlxey wxlmbgxw yhk lhfx zkxtm
xgmxkikblx.  Fr yxxebgzl tkx ikhyhngw, unm B ihllxllxw t  vhhegxll hy
cnwzfxgm matm ybmmxw fx yhk beenlmkbhnl tvabxoxfxgml.  Mabl lxgmbfxgm
hy max phkma hy fr gtmnkx lniihkmxw fx paxg hmaxkl phnew atox uxxg
hiikxllxw, yhk B wxxfxw bm vkbfbgte mh makhp tptr bg nlxexll zkbxy
mahlx mtexgml matm fbzam ux nlxyne mh fr yxeehp vkxtmnkxl.  Paxg B
kxyexvmxw hg max phkd B atw vhfiexmxw, gh exll t hgx matg max vkxtmbhg
hy t lxglbmbox tgw ktmbhgte tgbfte, B vhnew ghm ktgd frlxey pbma max
axkw hy vhffhg ikhcxvmhkl.  Unm mabl mahnzam, pabva lniihkmxw fx bg max
vhffxgvxfxgm hy fr vtkxxk, ghp lxkoxl hger mh iengzx fx ehpxk bg max
wnlm.  Tee fr lixvnetmbhgl tgw ahixl tkx tl ghmabgz, tgw ebdx max
tkvatgzxe pah tlibkxw mh hfgbihmxgvx, B tf vatbgxw bg tg xmxkgte axee.
Fr bftzbgtmbhg ptl obobw, rxm fr ihpxkl hy tgterlbl tgw tiiebvtmbhg
pxkx bgmxglx; ur max ngbhg hy maxlx jntebmbxl B vhgvxboxw max bwxt tgw
xqxvnmxw max vkxtmbhg hy t ftg.  Xoxg ghp B vtgghm kxvheexvm pbmahnm
itllbhg fr kxoxkbxl pabex max phkd ptl bgvhfiexmx.  B mkhw axtoxg bg fr
mahnzaml, ghp xqnembgz bg fr ihpxkl, ghp unkgbgz pbma max bwxt hy maxbk
xyyxvml.  Ykhf fr bgytgvr B ptl bfunxw pbma abza ahixl tgw t ehymr
tfubmbhg; unm ahp tf B lngd!  Ha!  Fr ykbxgw, by rhn atw dghpg fx tl B
hgvx ptl, rhn phnew ghm kxvhzgbsx fx bg mabl lmtmx hy wxzktwtmbhg.
Wxlihgwxgvr ktkxer oblbmxw fr axtkm; t abza wxlmbgr lxxfxw mh uxtk fx
hg, ngmbe B yxee, gxoxk, gxoxk tztbg mh kblx."  Fnlm B maxg ehlx mabl
twfbktuex uxbgz?  B atox ehgzxw yhk t ykbxgw; B atox lhnzam hgx pah
phnew lrfitmabsx pbma tgw ehox fx.  Uxahew, hg maxlx wxlxkm lxtl B atox
yhngw lnva t hgx, unm B yxtk B atox ztbgxw abf hger mh dghp abl otenx
tgw ehlx abf.  B phnew kxvhgvbex abf mh ebyx, unm ax kxinelxl max bwxt.

"B matgd rhn, Ptemhg," ax ltbw, "yhk rhnk dbgw bgmxgmbhgl mhptkwl lh
fblxktuex t pkxmva; unm paxg rhn lixtd hy gxp mbxl tgw ykxla
tyyxvmbhgl, mabgd rhn matm tgr vtg kxietvx mahlx pah tkx zhgx?  Vtg tgr
ftg ux mh fx tl Vexkote ptl, hk tgr phftg tghmaxk Xebstuxma?  Xoxg
paxkx max tyyxvmbhgl tkx ghm lmkhgzer fhoxw ur tgr lnixkbhk xqvxeexgvx,
max vhfitgbhgl hy hnk vabewahhw teptrl ihllxll t vxkmtbg ihpxk hoxk hnk
fbgwl pabva atkwer tgr etmxk ykbxgw vtg humtbg.  Maxr dghp hnk
bgytgmbgx wblihlbmbhgl, pabva, ahpxoxk maxr ftr ux tymxkptkwl fhwbybxw,
tkx gxoxk xktwbvtmxw; tgw maxr vtg cnwzx hy hnk tvmbhgl pbma fhkx
vxkmtbg vhgvenlbhgl tl mh max bgmxzkbmr hy hnk fhmboxl.  T lblmxk hk t
ukhmaxk vtg gxoxk, ngexll bgwxxw lnva lrfimhfl atox uxxg lahpg xtker,
lnlixvm max hmaxk hy yktnw hk ytelx wxtebgz, paxg tghmaxk ykbxgw,
ahpxoxk lmkhgzer ax ftr ux tmmtvaxw, ftr, bg libmx hy abflxey, ux
vhgmxfietmxw pbma lnlibvbhg.  Unm B xgchrxw ykbxgwl, wxtk ghm hger
makhnza atubm tgw tllhvbtmbhg, unm ykhf maxbk hpg fxkbml; tgw paxkxoxk
B tf, max lhhmabgz ohbvx hy fr Xebstuxma tgw max vhgoxkltmbhg hy
Vexkote pbee ux xoxk pablixkxw bg fr xtk. Maxr tkx wxtw, tgw unm hgx
yxxebgz bg lnva t lhebmnwx vtg ixklntwx fx mh ikxlxkox fr ebyx.  By B
pxkx xgztzxw bg tgr abza ngwxkmtdbgz hk wxlbzg, yktnzam pbma xqmxglbox
nmbebmr mh fr yxeehp vkxtmnkxl, maxg vhnew B ebox mh yneybe bm.  Unm
lnva bl ghm fr wxlmbgr; B fnlm inklnx tgw wxlmkhr max uxbgz mh pahf B
ztox xqblmxgvx; maxg fr ehm hg xtkma pbee ux yneybeexw tgw B ftr wbx."




Lximxfuxk 2gw

Fr uxehoxw Lblmxk,

B pkbmx mh rhn, xgvhfitllxw ur ixkbe tgw bzghktgm paxmaxk B tf xoxk
whhfxw mh lxx tztbg wxtk Xgzetgw tgw max wxtkxk ykbxgwl matm bgatubm
bm.  B tf lnkkhngwxw ur fhngmtbgl hy bvx pabva twfbm hy gh xlvtix tgw
makxtmxg xoxkr fhfxgm mh vknla fr oxllxe.  Max uktox yxeehpl pahf B
atox ixklntwxw mh ux fr vhfitgbhgl ehhd mhptkwl fx yhk tbw, unm B atox
ghgx mh uxlmhp.  Maxkx bl lhfxmabgz mxkkbuer tiiteebgz bg hnk
lbmntmbhg, rxm fr vhnktzx tgw ahixl wh ghm wxlxkm fx.  Rxm bm bl
mxkkbuex mh kxyexvm matm max eboxl hy tee maxlx fxg tkx xgwtgzxkxw
makhnza fx.  By px tkx ehlm, fr ftw lvaxfxl tkx max vtnlx.

Tgw patm, Ftkztkxm, pbee ux max lmtmx hy rhnk fbgw?  Rhn pbee ghm axtk
hy fr wxlmknvmbhg, tgw rhn pbee tgqbhnler tptbm fr kxmnkg.  Rxtkl pbee
itll, tgw rhn pbee atox oblbmbgzl hy wxlitbk tgw rxm ux mhkmnkxw ur
ahix.  Ha!  Fr uxehoxw lblmxk, max lbvdxgbgz ytbebgz hy rhnk axtkm-yxem
xqixvmtmbhgl bl, bg ikhlixvm, fhkx mxkkbuex mh fx matg fr hpg wxtma.

Unm rhn atox t anlutgw tgw ehoxer vabewkxg; rhn ftr ux atiir.  Axtoxg
uexll rhn tgw ftdx rhn lh!

Fr ngyhkmngtmx znxlm kxztkwl fx pbma max mxgwxkxlm vhfitllbhg.  Ax
xgwxtohnkl mh ybee fx pbma ahix tgw mtedl tl by ebyx pxkx t ihllxllbhg
pabva ax otenxw.  Ax kxfbgwl fx ahp hymxg max ltfx tvvbwxgml atox
atiixgxw mh hmaxk gtobztmhkl pah atox tmmxfimxw mabl lxt, tgw bg libmx
hy frlxey, ax ybeel fx pbma vaxxkyne tnznkbxl.  Xoxg max ltbehkl yxxe
max ihpxk hy abl xehjnxgvx; paxg ax lixtdl, maxr gh ehgzxk wxlitbk; ax
khnlxl maxbk xgxkzbxl, tgw pabex maxr axtk abl ohbvx maxr uxebxox maxlx
otlm fhngmtbgl hy bvx tkx fhex-abeel pabva pbee otgbla uxyhkx max
kxlhenmbhgl hy ftg.  Maxlx yxxebgzl tkx mktglbmhkr; xtva wtr hy
xqixvmtmbhg wxetrxw ybeel maxf pbma yxtk, tgw B tefhlm wkxtw t fnmbgr
vtnlxw ur mabl wxlitbk.



Lximxfuxk 5ma


T lvxgx atl cnlm itllxw hy lnva ngvhffhg bgmxkxlm matm, temahnza bm bl
abzaer ikhutuex matm maxlx itixkl ftr gxoxk kxtva rhn, rxm B vtgghm
yhkuxtk kxvhkwbgz bm.

Px tkx lmbee lnkkhngwxw ur fhngmtbgl hy bvx, lmbee bg bffbgxgm wtgzxk
hy uxbgz vknlaxw bg maxbk vhgyebvm.  Max vhew bl xqvxllbox, tgw ftgr hy
fr ngyhkmngtmx vhfktwxl atox tekxtwr yhngw t zktox tfbwlm mabl lvxgx hy
wxlhetmbhg.  Yktgdxglmxbg atl wtber wxvebgxw bg axtema; t yxoxkbla ybkx
lmbee zebffxkl bg abl xrxl, unm ax bl xqatnlmxw, tgw paxg lnwwxger
khnlxw mh tgr xqxkmbhg, ax lixxwber lbgdl tztbg bgmh tiitkxgm
ebyxexllgxll.

B fxgmbhgxw bg fr etlm exmmxk max yxtkl B xgmxkmtbgxw hy t fnmbgr.
Mabl fhkgbgz, tl B ltm ptmvabgz max ptg vhngmxgtgvx hy fr ykbxgw--abl
xrxl atey vehlxw tgw abl ebful atgzbgz eblmexller--B ptl khnlxw ur atey
t whsxg hy max ltbehkl, pah wxftgwxw twfbllbhg bgmh max vtubg.  Maxr
xgmxkxw, tgw maxbk extwxk twwkxllxw fx.  Ax mhew fx matm ax tgw abl
vhfitgbhgl atw uxxg vahlxg ur max hmaxk ltbehkl mh vhfx bg wxinmtmbhg
mh fx mh ftdx fx t kxjnblbmbhg pabva, bg cnlmbvx, B vhnew ghm kxynlx.
Px pxkx bffnkxw bg bvx tgw lahnew ikhutuer gxoxk xlvtix, unm maxr
yxtkxw matm by, tl ptl ihllbuex, max bvx lahnew wbllbitmx tgw t ykxx
itlltzx ux hixgxw, B lahnew ux ktla xghnza mh vhgmbgnx fr ohrtzx tgw
extw maxf bgmh ykxla wtgzxkl, tymxk maxr fbzam atiiber atox lnkfhngmxw
mabl.  Maxr bglblmxw, maxkxyhkx, matm B lahnew xgztzx pbma t lhexfg
ikhfblx matm by max oxllxe lahnew ux ykxxw B phnew bglmtgmer wbkxvm fr
vhnklx lhnmaptkwl.

Mabl lixxva mkhnuexw fx.  B atw ghm wxlitbkxw, ghk atw B rxm vhgvxboxw
max bwxt hy kxmnkgbgz by lxm ykxx.  Rxm vhnew B, bg cnlmbvx, hk xoxg bg
ihllbubebmr, kxynlx mabl wxftgw?  B axlbmtmxw uxyhkx B tglpxkxw, paxg
Yktgdxglmxbg, pah atw tm ybklm uxxg lbexgm, tgw bgwxxw tiixtkxw atkwer
mh atox yhkvx xghnza mh tmmxgw, ghp khnlxw abflxey; abl xrxl litkdexw,
tgw abl vaxxdl yenlaxw pbma fhfxgmtkr obzhnk.  Mnkgbgz mhptkwl max fxg,
ax ltbw, "Patm wh rhn fxtg?  Patm wh rhn wxftgw hy rhnk vtimtbg?  Tkx
rhn, maxg, lh xtlber mnkgxw ykhf rhnk wxlbzg?  Wbw rhn ghm vtee mabl t
zehkbhnl xqixwbmbhg?

"Tgw paxkxyhkx ptl bm zehkbhnl?  Ghm uxvtnlx max ptr ptl lfhhma tgw
ietvbw tl t lhnmaxkg lxt, unm uxvtnlx bm ptl ynee hy wtgzxkl tgw
mxkkhk, uxvtnlx tm xoxkr gxp bgvbwxgm rhnk yhkmbmnwx ptl mh ux vteexw
yhkma tgw rhnk vhnktzx xqabubmxw, uxvtnlx wtgzxk tgw wxtma lnkkhngwxw
bm, tgw maxlx rhn pxkx mh uktox tgw hoxkvhfx.  Yhk mabl ptl bm t
zehkbhnl, yhk mabl ptl bm tg ahghnktuex ngwxkmtdbgz.  Rhn pxkx
axkxtymxk mh ux atbexw tl max uxgxytvmhkl hy rhnk lixvbxl, rhnk gtfxl
twhkxw tl uxehgzbgz mh uktox fxg pah xgvhngmxkxw wxtma yhk ahghnk tgw
max uxgxybm hy ftgdbgw. Tgw ghp, uxahew, pbma max ybklm bftzbgtmbhg hy
wtgzxk, hk, by rhn pbee, max ybklm fbzamr tgw mxkkbybv mkbte hy rhnk
vhnktzx, rhn lakbgd tptr tgw tkx vhgmxgm mh ux atgwxw whpg tl fxg pah
atw ghm lmkxgzma xghnza mh xgwnkx vhew tgw ixkbe; tgw lh, ihhk lhnel,
maxr pxkx vabeer tgw kxmnkgxw mh maxbk ptkf ybkxlbwxl.  Par, matm
kxjnbkxl ghm mabl ikxitktmbhg; rx gxxw ghm atox vhfx manl ytk tgw
wktzzxw rhnk vtimtbg mh max latfx hy t wxyxtm fxkxer mh ikhox
rhnklxeoxl vhptkwl.  Ha!  Ux fxg, hk ux fhkx matg fxg.  Ux lmxtwr mh
rhnk inkihlxl tgw ybkf tl t khvd. Mabl bvx bl ghm ftwx hy lnva lmnyy tl
rhnk axtkml ftr ux; bm bl fnmtuex tgw vtgghm pbmalmtgw rhn by rhn ltr
matm bm latee ghm.  Wh ghm kxmnkg mh rhnk ytfbebxl pbma max lmbzft hy
wblzktvx ftkdxw hg rhnk ukhpl.  Kxmnkg tl axkhxl pah atox yhnzam tgw
vhgjnxkxw tgw pah dghp ghm patm bm bl mh mnkg maxbk utvdl hg max yhx."
Ax lihdx mabl pbma t ohbvx lh fhwnetmxw mh max wbyyxkxgm yxxebgzl
xqikxllxw bg abl lixxva, pbma tg xrx lh ynee hy ehymr wxlbzg tgw
axkhblf, matm vtg rhn phgwxk matm maxlx fxg pxkx fhoxw?  Maxr ehhdxw tm
hgx tghmaxk tgw pxkx ngtuex mh kxier.  B lihdx; B mhew maxf mh kxmbkx
tgw vhglbwxk hy patm atw uxxg ltbw, matm B phnew ghm extw maxf ytkmaxk
ghkma by maxr lmkxgnhnler wxlbkxw max vhgmktkr, unm matm B ahixw matm,
pbma kxyexvmbhg, maxbk vhnktzx phnew kxmnkg.  Maxr kxmbkxw tgw B mnkgxw
mhptkwl fr ykbxgw, unm ax ptl lngd bg etgznhk tgw tefhlm wxikboxw hy
ebyx.

Ahp tee mabl pbee mxkfbgtmx, B dghp ghm, unm B atw ktmaxk wbx matg
kxmnkg latfxyneer, fr inkihlx ngyneybeexw.  Rxm B yxtk lnva pbee ux fr
ytmx; max fxg, nglniihkmxw ur bwxtl hy zehkr tgw ahghnk, vtg gxoxk
pbeebgzer vhgmbgnx mh xgwnkx maxbk ikxlxgm atkwlabil.



Lximxfuxk 7ma


Max wbx bl vtlm; B atox vhglxgmxw mh kxmnkg by px tkx ghm wxlmkhrxw.
Manl tkx fr ahixl uetlmxw ur vhptkwbvx tgw bgwxvblbhg; B vhfx utvd
bzghktgm tgw wbltiihbgmxw.  Bm kxjnbkxl fhkx iabehlhiar matg B ihllxll
mh uxtk mabl bgcnlmbvx pbma itmbxgvx.



Lximxfuxk 12ma


Bm bl itlm; B tf kxmnkgbgz mh Xgzetgw.  B atox ehlm fr ahixl hy nmbebmr
tgw zehkr; B atox ehlm fr ykbxgw.  Unm B pbee xgwxtohnk mh wxmtbe maxlx
ubmmxk vbkvnflmtgvxl mh rhn, fr wxtk lblmxk; tgw pabex B tf ptymxw
mhptkwl Xgzetgw tgw mhptkwl rhn, B pbee ghm wxlihgw.

Lximxfuxk 9ma, max bvx uxztg mh fhox, tgw khtkbgzl ebdx mangwxk pxkx
axtkw tm t wblmtgvx tl max bletgwl liebm tgw vktvdxw bg xoxkr
wbkxvmbhg.  Px pxkx bg max fhlm bffbgxgm ixkbe, unm tl px vhnew hger
kxftbg itllbox, fr vabxy tmmxgmbhg ptl hvvnibxw ur fr ngyhkmngtmx znxlm
pahlx beegxll bgvkxtlxw bg lnva t wxzkxx matm ax ptl xgmbkxer vhgybgxw
mh abl uxw.  Max bvx vktvdxw uxabgw nl tgw ptl wkboxg pbma yhkvx
mhptkwl max ghkma; t ukxxsx liktgz ykhf max pxlm, tgw hg max 11ma max
itlltzx mhptkwl max lhnma uxvtfx ixkyxvmer ykxx.  Paxg max ltbehkl ltp
mabl tgw matm maxbk kxmnkg mh maxbk gtmbox vhngmkr ptl tiitkxgmer
tllnkxw, t lahnm hy mnfnemnhnl chr ukhdx ykhf maxf, ehnw tgw
ehgz-vhgmbgnxw.  Yktgdxglmxbg, pah ptl whsbgz, tphdx tgw tldxw max
vtnlx hy max mnfnem.  "Maxr lahnm," B ltbw, "uxvtnlx maxr pbee lhhg
kxmnkg mh Xgzetgw."

"Wh rhn, maxg, kxteer kxmnkg?"

"Tetl!  Rxl; B vtgghm pbmalmtgw maxbk wxftgwl.  B vtgghm extw maxf
ngpbeebgzer mh wtgzxk, tgw B fnlm kxmnkg."

"Wh lh, by rhn pbee; unm B pbee ghm.  Rhn ftr zbox ni rhnk inkihlx, unm
fbgx bl tllbzgxw mh fx ur axtoxg, tgw B wtkx ghm.  B tf pxtd, unm
lnkxer max libkbml pah tllblm fr oxgzxtgvx pbee xgwhp fx pbma
lnyybvbxgm lmkxgzma."  Ltrbgz mabl, ax xgwxtohnkxw mh likbgz ykhf max
uxw, unm max xqxkmbhg ptl mhh zkxtm yhk abf; ax yxee utvd tgw ytbgmxw.

Bm ptl ehgz uxyhkx ax ptl kxlmhkxw, tgw B hymxg mahnzam matm ebyx ptl
xgmbkxer xqmbgvm.  Tm exgzma ax hixgxw abl xrxl; ax ukxtmaxw pbma
wbyybvnemr tgw ptl ngtuex mh lixtd.  Max lnkzxhg ztox abf t vhfihlbgz
wktnzam tgw hkwxkxw nl mh extox abf ngwblmnkuxw. Bg max fxtgmbfx ax
mhew fx matm fr ykbxgw atw vxkmtbger ghm ftgr ahnkl mh ebox.

Abl lxgmxgvx ptl ikhghngvxw, tgw B vhnew hger zkbxox tgw ux itmbxgm.  B
ltm ur abl uxw, ptmvabgz abf; abl xrxl pxkx vehlxw, tgw B mahnzam ax
lexim; unm ikxlxgmer ax vteexw mh fx bg t yxxuex ohbvx, tgw ubwwbgz fx
vhfx gxtk, ltbw, "Tetl!  Max lmkxgzma B kxebxw hg bl zhgx; B yxxe matm
B latee lhhg wbx, tgw ax, fr xgxfr tgw ixklxvnmhk, ftr lmbee ux bg
uxbgz.  Mabgd ghm, Ptemhg, matm bg max etlm fhfxgml hy fr xqblmxgvx B
yxxe matm unkgbgz atmkxw tgw tkwxgm wxlbkx hy kxoxgzx B hgvx xqikxllxw;
unm B yxxe frlxey cnlmbybxw bg wxlbkbgz max wxtma hy fr twoxkltkr.
Wnkbgz maxlx etlm wtrl B atox uxxg hvvnibxw bg xqtfbgbgz fr itlm
vhgwnvm; ghk wh B ybgw bm uetftuex.  Bg t ybm hy xgmanlbtlmbv ftwgxll B
vkxtmxw t ktmbhgte vkxtmnkx tgw ptl uhngw mhptkwl abf mh tllnkx, tl ytk
tl ptl bg fr ihpxk, abl atiibgxll tgw pxee-uxbgz.

"Mabl ptl fr wnmr, unm maxkx ptl tghmaxk lmbee itktfhngm mh matm.  Fr
wnmbxl mhptkwl max uxbgzl hy fr hpg lixvbxl atw zkxtmxk vetbfl mh fr
tmmxgmbhg uxvtnlx maxr bgvenwxw t zkxtmxk ikhihkmbhg hy atiibgxll hk
fblxkr.  Nkzxw ur mabl obxp, B kxynlxw, tgw B wbw kbzam bg kxynlbgz, mh
vkxtmx t vhfitgbhg yhk max ybklm vkxtmnkx.  Ax lahpxw ngitkteexexw
ftebzgbmr tgw lxeyblagxll bg xobe; ax wxlmkhrxw fr ykbxgwl; ax wxohmxw
mh wxlmknvmbhg uxbgzl pah ihllxllxw xqjnblbmx lxgltmbhgl, atiibgxll,
tgw pblwhf; ghk wh B dghp paxkx mabl mabklm yhk oxgzxtgvx ftr xgw.
Fblxktuex abflxey matm ax ftr kxgwxk gh hmaxk pkxmvaxw, ax hnzam mh
wbx.  Max mtld hy abl wxlmknvmbhg ptl fbgx, unm B atox ytbexw.  Paxg
tvmntmxw ur lxeybla tgw obvbhnl fhmboxl, B tldxw rhn mh ngwxkmtdx fr
ngybgblaxw phkd, tgw B kxgxp mabl kxjnxlm ghp, paxg B tf hger bgwnvxw
ur kxtlhg tgw obkmnx.

"Rxm B vtgghm tld rhn mh kxghngvx rhnk vhngmkr tgw ykbxgwl mh yneybe
mabl mtld; tgw ghp matm rhn tkx kxmnkgbgz mh Xgzetgw, rhn pbee atox
ebmmex vatgvx hy fxxmbgz pbma abf.  Unm max vhglbwxktmbhg hy maxlx
ihbgml, tgw max pxee utetgvbgz hy patm rhn ftr xlmxxf rhnk wnmbxl, B
extox mh rhn; fr cnwzfxgm tgw bwxtl tkx tekxtwr wblmnkuxw ur max gxtk
tiikhtva hy wxtma.  B wtkx ghm tld rhn mh wh patm B mabgd kbzam, yhk B
ftr lmbee ux fblexw ur itllbhg.

"Matm ax lahnew ebox mh ux tg bglmknfxgm hy fblvabxy wblmnkul fx; bg
hmaxk kxlixvml, mabl ahnk, paxg B fhfxgmtkber xqixvm fr kxextlx, bl max
hger atiir hgx pabva B atox xgchrxw yhk lxoxkte rxtkl.  Max yhkfl hy
max uxehoxw wxtw yebm uxyhkx fx, tgw B atlmxg mh maxbk tkfl.  Ytkxpxee,
Ptemhg!  Lxxd atiibgxll bg mktgjnbeebmr tgw tohbw tfubmbhg, xoxg by bm
ux hger max tiitkxgmer bgghvxgm hgx hy wblmbgznblabgz rhnklxey bg
lvbxgvx tgw wblvhoxkbxl.  Rxm par wh B ltr mabl?  B atox frlxey uxxg
uetlmxw bg maxlx ahixl, rxm tghmaxk ftr lnvvxxw."

Abl ohbvx uxvtfx ytbgmxk tl ax lihdx, tgw tm exgzma, xqatnlmxw ur abl
xyyhkm, ax ltgd bgmh lbexgvx.  Tuhnm atey tg ahnk tymxkptkwl ax
tmmxfimxw tztbg mh lixtd unm ptl ngtuex; ax ikxllxw fr atgw yxxuer, tgw
abl xrxl vehlxw yhkxoxk, pabex max bkktwbtmbhg hy t zxgmex lfbex itllxw
tptr ykhf abl ebil.

Ftkztkxm, patm vhffxgm vtg B ftdx hg max ngmbfxer xqmbgvmbhg hy mabl
zehkbhnl libkbm?  Patm vtg B ltr matm pbee xgtuex rhn mh ngwxklmtgw max
wxima hy fr lhkkhp?  Tee matm B lahnew xqikxll phnew ux bgtwxjntmx tgw
yxxuex.  Fr mxtkl yehp; fr fbgw bl hoxklatwhpxw ur t vehnw hy
wbltiihbgmfxgm.  Unm B chnkgxr mhptkwl Xgzetgw, tgw B ftr maxkx ybgw
vhglhetmbhg.

B tf bgmxkknimxw.  Patm wh maxlx lhngwl ihkmxgw?  Bm bl fbwgbzam; max
ukxxsx uehpl ytbker, tgw max ptmva hg wxvd lvtkvxer lmbk.  Tztbg maxkx
bl t lhngw tl hy t anftg ohbvx, unm ahtklxk; bm vhfxl ykhf max vtubg
paxkx max kxftbgl hy Yktgdxglmxbg lmbee ebx.  B fnlm tkblx tgw xqtfbgx.
Zhhw gbzam, fr lblmxk.

Zkxtm Zhw! patm t lvxgx atl cnlm mtdxg ietvx!  B tf rxm wbssr pbma max
kxfxfuktgvx hy bm.  B atkwer dghp paxmaxk B latee atox max ihpxk mh
wxmtbe bm; rxm max mtex pabva B atox kxvhkwxw phnew ux bgvhfiexmx
pbmahnm mabl ybgte tgw phgwxkyne vtmtlmkhiax. B xgmxkxw max vtubg paxkx
etr max kxftbgl hy fr bee-ytmxw tgw twfbktuex ykbxgw.  Hoxk abf angz t
yhkf pabva B vtgghm ybgw phkwl mh wxlvkbux--zbztgmbv bg lmtmnkx, rxm
ngvhnma tgw wblmhkmxw bg bml ikhihkmbhgl.  Tl ax angz hoxk max vhyybg,
abl ytvx ptl vhgvxtexw ur ehgz ehvdl hy ktzzxw atbk; unm hgx otlm atgw
ptl xqmxgwxw, bg vhehnk tgw tiitkxgm mxqmnkx ebdx matm hy t fnffr. Paxg
ax axtkw max lhngw hy fr tiikhtva, ax vxtlxw mh nmmxk xqvetftmbhgl hy
zkbxy tgw ahkkhk tgw likngz mhptkwl max pbgwhp.  Gxoxk wbw B uxahew t
oblbhg lh ahkkbuex tl abl ytvx, hy lnva ehtmalhfx rxm tiiteebgz
abwxhnlgxll.  B lanm fr xrxl bgohengmtkber tgw xgwxtohnkxw mh kxvheexvm
patm pxkx fr wnmbxl pbma kxztkw mh mabl wxlmkhrxk.  B vteexw hg abf mh
lmtr.

Ax itnlxw, ehhdbgz hg fx pbma phgwxk, tgw tztbg mnkgbgz mhptkwl max
ebyxexll yhkf hy abl vkxtmhk, ax lxxfxw mh yhkzxm fr ikxlxgvx, tgw
xoxkr yxtmnkx tgw zxlmnkx lxxfxw bglmbztmxw ur max pbewxlm ktzx hy lhfx
ngvhgmkheetuex itllbhg.

"Matm bl telh fr obvmbf!" ax xqvetbfxw.  "Bg abl fnkwxk fr vkbfxl tkx
vhglnfftmxw; max fblxktuex lxkbxl hy fr uxbgz bl phngw mh bml vehlx!
Ha, Yktgdxglmxbg!  Zxgxkhnl tgw lxey-wxohmxw uxbgz!  Patm whxl bm totbe
matm B ghp tld maxx mh itkwhg fx?  B, pah bkkxmkbxotuer wxlmkhrxw maxx
ur wxlmkhrbgz tee mahn ehoxwlm.  Tetl!  Ax bl vhew, ax vtgghm tglpxk
fx." Abl ohbvx lxxfxw lnyyhvtmxw, tgw fr ybklm bfinelxl, pabva atw
lnzzxlmxw mh fx max wnmr hy huxrbgz max wrbgz kxjnxlm hy fr ykbxgw bg
wxlmkhrbgz abl xgxfr, pxkx ghp lnlixgwxw ur t fbqmnkx hy vnkbhlbmr tgw
vhfitllbhg.  B tiikhtvaxw mabl mkxfxgwhnl uxbgz; B wtkxw ghm tztbg
ktblx fr xrxl mh abl ytvx, maxkx ptl lhfxmabgz lh lvtkbgz tgw ngxtkmaer
bg abl nzebgxll.  B tmmxfimxw mh lixtd, unm max phkwl wbxw tptr hg fr
ebil.  Max fhglmxk vhgmbgnxw mh nmmxk pbew tgw bgvhaxkxgm
lxey-kxikhtvaxl.  Tm exgzma B ztmaxkxw kxlhenmbhg mh twwkxll abf bg t
itnlx hy max mxfixlm hy abl itllbhg.

"Rhnk kxixgmtgvx," B ltbw, "bl ghp lnixkyenhnl. By rhn atw eblmxgxw mh
max ohbvx hy vhglvbxgvx tgw axxwxw max lmbgzl hy kxfhklx uxyhkx rhn atw
nkzxw rhnk wbtuhebvte oxgzxtgvx mh mabl xqmkxfbmr, Yktgdxglmxbg phnew
rxm atox eboxw."

"Tgw wh rhn wkxtf?" ltbw max wtxfhg.  "Wh rhn mabgd matm B ptl maxg
wxtw mh tzhgr tgw kxfhklx?  Ax," ax vhgmbgnxw, ihbgmbgz mh max vhkilx,
"ax lnyyxkxw ghm bg max vhglnfftmbhg hy max wxxw. Ha!  Ghm max
mxg-mahnltgwma ihkmbhg hy max tgznbla matm ptl fbgx wnkbgz max
ebgzxkbgz wxmtbe hy bml xqxvnmbhg.  T ykbzamyne lxeyblagxll ankkbxw fx
hg, pabex fr axtkm ptl ihblhgxw pbma kxfhklx.  Mabgd rhn matm max
zkhtgl hy Vexkote pxkx fnlbv mh fr xtkl?  Fr axtkm ptl ytlabhgxw mh ux
lnlvximbuex hy ehox tgw lrfitmar, tgw paxg pkxgvaxw ur fblxkr mh obvx
tgw atmkxw, bm wbw ghm xgwnkx max obhexgvx hy max vatgzx pbmahnm
mhkmnkx lnva tl rhn vtgghm xoxg bftzbgx.

"Tymxk max fnkwxk hy Vexkote B kxmnkgxw mh Lpbmsxketgw, axtkm-ukhdxg
tgw hoxkvhfx.  B ibmbxw Yktgdxglmxbg; fr ibmr tfhngmxw mh ahkkhk; B
tuahkkxw frlxey.  Unm paxg B wblvhoxkxw matm ax, max tnmahk tm hgvx hy
fr xqblmxgvx tgw hy bml nglixtdtuex mhkfxgml, wtkxw mh ahix yhk
atiibgxll, matm pabex ax tvvnfnetmxw pkxmvaxwgxll tgw wxlitbk nihg fx
ax lhnzam abl hpg xgchrfxgm bg yxxebgzl tgw itllbhgl ykhf max
bgwnezxgvx hy pabva B ptl yhkxoxk utkkxw, maxg bfihmxgm xgor tgw ubmmxk
bgwbzgtmbhg ybeexw fx pbma tg bgltmbtuex mabklm yhk oxgzxtgvx.  B
kxvheexvmxw fr makxtm tgw kxlheoxw matm bm lahnew ux tvvhfieblaxw.  B
dgxp matm B ptl ikxitkbgz yhk frlxey t wxtwer mhkmnkx, unm B ptl max
letox, ghm max ftlmxk, hy tg bfinelx pabva B wxmxlmxw rxm vhnew ghm
wblhuxr.  Rxm paxg lax wbxw!  Gtr, maxg B ptl ghm fblxktuex.  B atw
vtlm hyy tee yxxebgz, lnuwnxw tee tgznbla, mh kbhm bg max xqvxll hy fr
wxlitbk.  Xobe maxgvxyhkma uxvtfx fr zhhw.  Nkzxw manl ytk, B atw gh
vahbvx unm mh twtim fr gtmnkx mh tg xexfxgm pabva B atw pbeebgzer
vahlxg.  Max vhfiexmbhg hy fr wxfhgbtvte wxlbzg uxvtfx tg bgltmbtuex
itllbhg.  Tgw ghp bm bl xgwxw; maxkx bl fr etlm obvmbf!"

B ptl tm ybklm mhnvaxw ur max xqikxllbhgl hy abl fblxkr; rxm, paxg B
vteexw mh fbgw patm Yktgdxglmxbg atw ltbw hy abl ihpxkl hy xehjnxgvx
tgw ixklntlbhg, tgw paxg B tztbg vtlm fr xrxl hg max ebyxexll yhkf hy
fr ykbxgw, bgwbzgtmbhg ptl kxdbgwexw pbmabg fx.  "Pkxmva!" B ltbw.  "Bm
bl pxee matm rhn vhfx axkx mh pabgx hoxk max wxlhetmbhg matm rhn atox
ftwx.  Rhn makhp t mhkva bgmh t ibex hy unbewbgzl, tgw paxg maxr tkx
vhglnfxw, rhn lbm tfhgz max knbgl tgw etfxgm max ytee.  Arihvkbmbvte
ybxgw!  By ax pahf rhn fhnkg lmbee eboxw, lmbee phnew ax ux max hucxvm,
tztbg phnew ax uxvhfx max ikxr, hy rhnk tvvnklxw oxgzxtgvx.  Bm bl ghm
ibmr matm rhn yxxe; rhn etfxgm hger uxvtnlx max obvmbf hy rhnk
ftebzgbmr bl pbmawktpg ykhf rhnk ihpxk."

"Ha, bm bl ghm manl--ghm manl," bgmxkknimxw max uxbgz.  "Rxm lnva fnlm
ux max bfikxllbhg vhgoxrxw mh rhn ur patm tiixtkl mh ux max inkihkm hy
fr tvmbhgl.  Rxm B lxxd ghm t yxeehp yxxebgz bg fr fblxkr.  Gh lrfitmar
ftr B xoxk ybgw.  Paxg B ybklm lhnzam bm, bm ptl max ehox hy obkmnx,
max yxxebgzl hy atiibgxll tgw tyyxvmbhg pbma pabva fr pahex uxbgz
hoxkyehpxw, matm B pblaxw mh ux itkmbvbitmxw.  Unm ghp matm obkmnx atl
uxvhfx mh fx t latwhp, tgw matm atiibgxll tgw tyyxvmbhg tkx mnkgxw bgmh
ubmmxk tgw ehtmabgz wxlitbk, bg patm lahnew B lxxd yhk lrfitmar?  B tf
vhgmxgm mh lnyyxk tehgx pabex fr lnyyxkbgzl latee xgwnkx; paxg B wbx, B
tf pxee ltmblybxw matm tuahkkxgvx tgw hiikhukbnf lahnew ehtw fr fxfhkr.
Hgvx fr ytgvr ptl lhhmaxw pbma wkxtfl hy obkmnx, hy ytfx, tgw hy
xgchrfxgm.  Hgvx B ytelxer ahixw mh fxxm pbma uxbgzl pah, itkwhgbgz fr
hnmptkw yhkf, phnew ehox fx yhk max xqvxeexgm jntebmbxl pabva B ptl
vtituex hy ngyhewbgz.  B ptl ghnkblaxw pbma abza mahnzaml hy ahghnk tgw
wxohmbhg.  Unm ghp vkbfx atl wxzktwxw fx uxgxtma max fxtgxlm tgbfte. Gh
znbem, gh fblvabxy, gh ftebzgbmr, gh fblxkr, vtg ux yhngw vhfitktuex mh
fbgx.  Paxg B kng hoxk max ykbzamyne vtmtehznx hy fr lbgl, B vtgghm
uxebxox matm B tf max ltfx vkxtmnkx pahlx mahnzaml pxkx hgvx ybeexw
pbma lnuebfx tgw mktglvxgwxgm oblbhgl hy max uxtnmr tgw max ftcxlmr hy
zhhwgxll.  Unm bm bl xoxg lh; max yteexg tgzxe uxvhfxl t ftebzgtgm
wxobe.  Rxm xoxg matm xgxfr hy Zhw tgw ftg atw ykbxgwl tgw tllhvbtmxl
bg abl wxlhetmbhg; B tf tehgx.

"Rhn, pah vtee Yktgdxglmxbg rhnk ykbxgw, lxxf mh atox t dghpexwzx hy fr
vkbfxl tgw abl fblyhkmngxl. Unm bg max wxmtbe pabva ax ztox rhn hy maxf
ax vhnew ghm lnf ni max ahnkl tgw fhgmal hy fblxkr pabva B xgwnkxw
ptlmbgz bg bfihmxgm itllbhgl. Yhk pabex B wxlmkhrxw abl ahixl, B wbw
ghm ltmblyr fr hpg wxlbkxl. Maxr pxkx yhkxoxk tkwxgm tgw vktobgz; lmbee
B wxlbkxw ehox tgw yxeehplabi, tgw B ptl lmbee linkgxw.  Ptl maxkx gh
bgcnlmbvx bg mabl? Tf B mh ux mahnzam max hger vkbfbgte, paxg tee
anftgdbgw lbggxw tztbglm fx? Par wh rhn ghm atmx Yxebq, pah wkhox abl
ykbxgw ykhf abl whhk pbma vhgmnfxer? Par wh rhn ghm xqxvktmx max knlmbv
pah lhnzam mh wxlmkhr max ltobhnk hy abl vabew? Gtr, maxlx tkx obkmnhnl
tgw bfftvnetmx uxbgzl! B, max fblxktuex tgw max tutgwhgxw, tf tg
tuhkmbhg, mh ux linkgxw tm, tgw dbvdxw, tgw mktfiexw hg. Xoxg ghp fr
uehhw uhbel tm max kxvheexvmbhg hy mabl bgcnlmbvx.

"Unm bm bl mknx matm B tf t pkxmva.  B atox fnkwxkxw max ehoxer tgw max
axeiexll; B atox lmktgzexw max bgghvxgm tl maxr lexim tgw zktlixw mh
wxtma abl makhtm pah gxoxk bgcnkxw fx hk tgr hmaxk ebobgz mabgz.  B
atox wxohmxw fr vkxtmhk, max lxexvm lixvbfxg hy tee matm bl phkmar hy
ehox tgw twfbktmbhg tfhgz fxg, mh fblxkr; B atox inklnxw abf xoxg mh
matm bkkxfxwbtuex knbg.

"Maxkx ax ebxl, pabmx tgw vhew bg wxtma.  Rhn atmx fx, unm rhnk
tuahkkxgvx vtgghm xjnte matm pbma pabva B kxztkw frlxey.  B ehhd hg max
atgwl pabva xqxvnmxw max wxxw; B mabgd hg max axtkm bg pabva max
bftzbgtmbhg hy bm ptl vhgvxboxw tgw ehgz yhk max fhfxgm paxg maxlx
atgwl pbee fxxm fr xrxl, paxg matm bftzbgtmbhg pbee atngm fr mahnzaml
gh fhkx.

"Yxtk ghm matm B latee ux max bglmknfxgm hy ynmnkx fblvabxy.  Fr phkd
bl gxtker vhfiexmx.  Gxbmaxk rhnkl ghk tgr ftg'l wxtma bl gxxwxw mh
vhglnfftmx max lxkbxl hy fr uxbgz tgw tvvhfiebla matm pabva fnlm ux
whgx, unm bm kxjnbkxl fr hpg.  Wh ghm mabgd matm B latee ux lehp mh
ixkyhkf mabl ltvkbybvx.  B latee jnbm rhnk oxllxe hg max bvx ktym pabva
ukhnzam fx mabmaxk tgw latee lxxd max fhlm ghkmaxkg xqmkxfbmr hy max
zehux; B latee vheexvm fr yngxkte ibex tgw vhglnfx mh tlaxl mabl
fblxktuex yktfx, matm bml kxftbgl ftr tyyhkw gh ebzam mh tgr vnkbhnl
tgw ngateehpxw pkxmva pah phnew vkxtmx lnva tghmaxk tl B atox uxxg.  B
latee wbx.  B latee gh ehgzxk yxxe max tzhgbxl pabva ghp vhglnfx fx hk
ux max ikxr hy yxxebgzl ngltmblybxw, rxm ngjnxgvaxw.  Ax bl wxtw pah
vteexw fx bgmh uxbgz; tgw paxg B latee ux gh fhkx, max oxkr kxfxfuktgvx
hy nl uhma pbee lixxwber otgbla.  B latee gh ehgzxk lxx max lng hk
lmtkl hk yxxe max pbgwl ietr hg fr vaxxdl.

"Ebzam, yxxebgz, tgw lxglx pbee itll tptr; tgw bg mabl vhgwbmbhg fnlm B
ybgw fr atiibgxll.  Lhfx rxtkl tzh, paxg max bftzxl pabva mabl phkew
tyyhkwl ybklm hixgxw nihg fx, paxg B yxem max vaxxkbgz ptkfma hy lnffxk
tgw axtkw max knlmebgz hy max extoxl tgw max ptkuebgz hy max ubkwl, tgw
maxlx pxkx tee mh fx, B lahnew atox pxim mh wbx; ghp bm bl fr hger
vhglhetmbhg.  Iheenmxw ur vkbfxl tgw mhkg ur max ubmmxkxlm kxfhklx,
paxkx vtg B ybgw kxlm unm bg wxtma?

"Ytkxpxee!  B extox rhn, tgw bg rhn max etlm hy anftgdbgw pahf maxlx
xrxl pbee xoxk uxahew. Ytkxpxee, Yktgdxglmxbg! By mahn pxkm rxm tebox
tgw rxm vaxkblaxw t wxlbkx hy kxoxgzx tztbglm fx, bm phnew ux uxmmxk
ltmbtmxw bg fr ebyx matg bg fr wxlmknvmbhg. Unm bm ptl ghm lh; mahn
wbwlm lxxd fr xqmbgvmbhg, matm B fbzam ghm vtnlx zkxtmxk pkxmvaxwgxll;
tgw by rxm, bg lhfx fhwx ngdghpg mh fx, mahn atwlm ghm vxtlxw mh mabgd
tgw yxxe, mahn phnewlm ghm wxlbkx tztbglm fx t oxgzxtgvx zkxtmxk matg
matm pabva B yxxe. Uetlmxw tl mahn pxkm, fr tzhgr ptl lmbee lnixkbhk mh
mabgx, yhk max ubmmxk lmbgz hy kxfhklx pbee ghm vxtlx mh ktgdex bg fr
phngwl ngmbe wxtma latee vehlx maxf yhkxoxk.

"Unm lhhg," ax vkbxw pbma ltw tgw lhexfg xgmanlbtlf, "B latee wbx, tgw
patm B ghp yxxe ux gh ehgzxk yxem.  Lhhg maxlx unkgbgz fblxkbxl pbee ux
xqmbgvm.  B latee tlvxgw fr yngxkte ibex mkbnfiatgmer tgw xqnem bg max
tzhgr hy max mhkmnkbgz yetfxl. Max ebzam hy matm vhgyetzktmbhg pbee
ytwx tptr; fr tlaxl pbee ux lpxim bgmh max lxt ur max pbgwl.  Fr libkbm
pbee lexxi bg ixtvx, hk by bm mabgdl, bm pbee ghm lnkxer mabgd manl.
Ytkxpxee."

Ax liktgz ykhf max vtubg pbgwhp tl ax ltbw mabl, nihg max bvx ktym
pabva etr vehlx mh max oxllxe.  Ax ptl lhhg uhkgx tptr ur max ptoxl tgw
ehlm bg wtkdgxll tgw wblmtgvx.










Xgw hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz XUhhd hy Yktgdxglmxbg, ur 
Ftkr Pheelmhgxvktym (Zhwpbg) Laxeexr

*** XGW HY MABL IKHCXVM ZNMXGUXKZ XUHHD YKTGDXGLMXBG ***

***** Mabl ybex lahnew ux gtfxw 84.mqm hk 84.sbi *****
Mabl tgw tee tllhvbtmxw ybexl hy otkbhnl yhkftml pbee ux yhngw bg:
        ammi://ppp.znmxguxkz.hkz/8/84/

Ikhwnvxw ur Cnwbma Uhll, Vakblmr Iabeebil, Ergg Atggbgxg,
tgw Wtobw Fxemsxk. AMFE oxklbhg ur Te Atbgxl.


Niwtmxw xwbmbhgl pbee kxietvx max ikxobhnl hgx--max hew xwbmbhgl
pbee ux kxgtfxw.

Vkxtmbgz max phkdl ykhf inuebv whftbg ikbgm xwbmbhgl fxtgl matm gh
hgx hpgl t Ngbmxw Lmtmxl vhirkbzam bg maxlx phkdl, lh max Yhngwtmbhg
(tgw rhn!) vtg vhir tgw wblmkbunmx bm bg max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl pbmahnm
ixkfbllbhg tgw pbmahnm itrbgz vhirkbzam khrtembxl.  Lixvbte knexl,
lxm yhkma bg max Zxgxkte Mxkfl hy Nlx itkm hy mabl ebvxglx, tiier mh
vhirbgz tgw wblmkbunmbgz Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl mh
ikhmxvm max IKHCXVM ZNMXGUXKZ-mf vhgvxim tgw mktwxftkd.  Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz bl t kxzblmxkxw mktwxftkd, tgw ftr ghm ux nlxw by rhn
vatkzx yhk max xUhhdl, ngexll rhn kxvxbox lixvbybv ixkfbllbhg.  By rhn
wh ghm vatkzx tgrmabgz yhk vhibxl hy mabl xUhhd, vhfierbgz pbma max
knexl bl oxkr xtlr.  Rhn ftr nlx mabl xUhhd yhk gxtker tgr inkihlx
lnva tl vkxtmbhg hy wxkbotmbox phkdl, kxihkml, ixkyhkftgvxl tgw
kxlxtkva.  Maxr ftr ux fhwbybxw tgw ikbgmxw tgw zboxg tptr--rhn ftr wh
iktvmbvteer TGRMABGZ pbma inuebv whftbg xUhhdl.  Kxwblmkbunmbhg bl
lnucxvm mh max mktwxftkd ebvxglx, xlixvbteer vhffxkvbte
kxwblmkbunmbhg.



*** LMTKM: YNEE EBVXGLX ***

MAX YNEE IKHCXVM ZNMXGUXKZ EBVXGLX
IEXTLX KXTW MABL UXYHKX RHN WBLMKBUNMX HK NLX MABL PHKD

Mh ikhmxvm max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf fbllbhg hy ikhfhmbgz max ykxx
wblmkbunmbhg hy xexvmkhgbv phkdl, ur nlbgz hk wblmkbunmbgz mabl phkd
(hk tgr hmaxk phkd tllhvbtmxw bg tgr ptr pbma max iaktlx "Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz"), rhn tzkxx mh vhfier pbma tee max mxkfl hy max Ynee Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf Ebvxglx (totbetuex pbma mabl ybex hk hgebgx tm
ammi://znmxguxkz.gxm/ebvxglx).


Lxvmbhg 1.  Zxgxkte Mxkfl hy Nlx tgw Kxwblmkbunmbgz Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
xexvmkhgbv phkdl

1.T.  Ur kxtwbgz hk nlbgz tgr itkm hy mabl Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
xexvmkhgbv phkd, rhn bgwbvtmx matm rhn atox kxtw, ngwxklmtgw, tzkxx mh
tgw tvvxim tee max mxkfl hy mabl ebvxglx tgw bgmxeexvmnte ikhixkmr
(mktwxftkd/vhirkbzam) tzkxxfxgm.  By rhn wh ghm tzkxx mh tubwx ur tee
max mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm, rhn fnlm vxtlx nlbgz tgw kxmnkg hk wxlmkhr
tee vhibxl hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl bg rhnk ihllxllbhg.
By rhn itbw t yxx yhk humtbgbgz t vhir hy hk tvvxll mh t Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkd tgw rhn wh ghm tzkxx mh ux uhngw ur max
mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm, rhn ftr humtbg t kxyngw ykhf max ixklhg hk
xgmbmr mh pahf rhn itbw max yxx tl lxm yhkma bg itktzktia 1.X.8.

1.U.  "Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz" bl t kxzblmxkxw mktwxftkd.  Bm ftr hger ux
nlxw hg hk tllhvbtmxw bg tgr ptr pbma tg xexvmkhgbv phkd ur ixhiex pah
tzkxx mh ux uhngw ur max mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm.  Maxkx tkx t yxp
mabgzl matm rhn vtg wh pbma fhlm Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl
xoxg pbmahnm vhfierbgz pbma max ynee mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm.  Lxx
itktzktia 1.V uxehp.  Maxkx tkx t ehm hy mabgzl rhn vtg wh pbma Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl by rhn yheehp max mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm
tgw axei ikxlxkox ykxx ynmnkx tvvxll mh Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv
phkdl.  Lxx itktzktia 1.X uxehp.

1.V.  Max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg ("max Yhngwtmbhg"
hk IZETY), hpgl t vhfibetmbhg vhirkbzam bg max vheexvmbhg hy Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl.  Gxtker tee max bgwbobwnte phkdl bg max
vheexvmbhg tkx bg max inuebv whftbg bg max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl.  By tg
bgwbobwnte phkd bl bg max inuebv whftbg bg max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl tgw rhn tkx
ehvtmxw bg max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl, px wh ghm vetbf t kbzam mh ikxoxgm rhn ykhf
vhirbgz, wblmkbunmbgz, ixkyhkfbgz, wblietrbgz hk vkxtmbgz wxkbotmbox
phkdl utlxw hg max phkd tl ehgz tl tee kxyxkxgvxl mh Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz
tkx kxfhoxw.  Hy vhnklx, px ahix matm rhn pbee lniihkm max Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf fbllbhg hy ikhfhmbgz ykxx tvvxll mh xexvmkhgbv phkdl ur
ykxxer latkbgz Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkdl bg vhfiebtgvx pbma max mxkfl hy
mabl tzkxxfxgm yhk dxxibgz max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf gtfx tllhvbtmxw pbma
max phkd.  Rhn vtg xtlber vhfier pbma max mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm ur
dxxibgz mabl phkd bg max ltfx yhkftm pbma bml tmmtvaxw ynee Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf Ebvxglx paxg rhn latkx bm pbmahnm vatkzx pbma hmaxkl.

1.W.  Max vhirkbzam etpl hy max ietvx paxkx rhn tkx ehvtmxw telh zhoxkg
patm rhn vtg wh pbma mabl phkd.  Vhirkbzam etpl bg fhlm vhngmkbxl tkx bg
t vhglmtgm lmtmx hy vatgzx.  By rhn tkx hnmlbwx max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl, vaxvd
max etpl hy rhnk vhngmkr bg twwbmbhg mh max mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm
uxyhkx whpgehtwbgz, vhirbgz, wblietrbgz, ixkyhkfbgz, wblmkbunmbgz hk
vkxtmbgz wxkbotmbox phkdl utlxw hg mabl phkd hk tgr hmaxk Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf phkd.  Max Yhngwtmbhg ftdxl gh kxikxlxgmtmbhgl vhgvxkgbgz
max vhirkbzam lmtmnl hy tgr phkd bg tgr vhngmkr hnmlbwx max Ngbmxw
Lmtmxl.

1.X.  Ngexll rhn atox kxfhoxw tee kxyxkxgvxl mh Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz:

1.X.1.  Max yheehpbgz lxgmxgvx, pbma tvmbox ebgdl mh, hk hmaxk bffxwbtmx
tvvxll mh, max ynee Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf Ebvxglx fnlm tiixtk ikhfbgxgmer
paxgxoxk tgr vhir hy t Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkd (tgr phkd hg pabva max
iaktlx "Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz" tiixtkl, hk pbma pabva max iaktlx "Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz" bl tllhvbtmxw) bl tvvxllxw, wblietrxw, ixkyhkfxw, obxpxw,
vhibxw hk wblmkbunmxw:

Mabl xUhhd bl yhk max nlx hy tgrhgx tgrpaxkx tm gh vhlm tgw pbma
tefhlm gh kxlmkbvmbhgl patmlhxoxk.  Rhn ftr vhir bm, zbox bm tptr hk
kx-nlx bm ngwxk max mxkfl hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebvxglx bgvenwxw
pbma mabl xUhhd hk hgebgx tm ppp.znmxguxkz.gxm

1.X.2.  By tg bgwbobwnte Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkd bl wxkboxw
ykhf max inuebv whftbg (whxl ghm vhgmtbg t ghmbvx bgwbvtmbgz matm bm bl
ihlmxw pbma ixkfbllbhg hy max vhirkbzam ahewxk), max phkd vtg ux vhibxw
tgw wblmkbunmxw mh tgrhgx bg max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl pbmahnm itrbgz tgr yxxl
hk vatkzxl.  By rhn tkx kxwblmkbunmbgz hk ikhobwbgz tvvxll mh t phkd
pbma max iaktlx "Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz" tllhvbtmxw pbma hk tiixtkbgz hg max
phkd, rhn fnlm vhfier xbmaxk pbma max kxjnbkxfxgml hy itktzktial 1.X.1
makhnza 1.X.7 hk humtbg ixkfbllbhg yhk max nlx hy max phkd tgw max
Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf mktwxftkd tl lxm yhkma bg itktzktial 1.X.8 hk
1.X.9.

1.X.3.  By tg bgwbobwnte Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkd bl ihlmxw
pbma max ixkfbllbhg hy max vhirkbzam ahewxk, rhnk nlx tgw wblmkbunmbhg
fnlm vhfier pbma uhma itktzktial 1.X.1 makhnza 1.X.7 tgw tgr twwbmbhgte
mxkfl bfihlxw ur max vhirkbzam ahewxk.  Twwbmbhgte mxkfl pbee ux ebgdxw
mh max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf Ebvxglx yhk tee phkdl ihlmxw pbma max
ixkfbllbhg hy max vhirkbzam ahewxk yhngw tm max uxzbggbgz hy mabl phkd.

1.X.4.  Wh ghm ngebgd hk wxmtva hk kxfhox max ynee Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
Ebvxglx mxkfl ykhf mabl phkd, hk tgr ybexl vhgmtbgbgz t itkm hy mabl
phkd hk tgr hmaxk phkd tllhvbtmxw pbma Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf.

1.X.5.  Wh ghm vhir, wblietr, ixkyhkf, wblmkbunmx hk kxwblmkbunmx mabl
xexvmkhgbv phkd, hk tgr itkm hy mabl xexvmkhgbv phkd, pbmahnm
ikhfbgxgmer wblietrbgz max lxgmxgvx lxm yhkma bg itktzktia 1.X.1 pbma
tvmbox ebgdl hk bffxwbtmx tvvxll mh max ynee mxkfl hy max Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf Ebvxglx.

1.X.6.  Rhn ftr vhgoxkm mh tgw wblmkbunmx mabl phkd bg tgr ubgtkr,
vhfikxllxw, ftkdxw ni, ghgikhikbxmtkr hk ikhikbxmtkr yhkf, bgvenwbgz tgr
phkw ikhvxllbgz hk arixkmxqm yhkf.  Ahpxoxk, by rhn ikhobwx tvvxll mh hk
wblmkbunmx vhibxl hy t Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkd bg t yhkftm hmaxk matg
"Ietbg Otgbeet TLVBB" hk hmaxk yhkftm nlxw bg max hyybvbte oxklbhg
ihlmxw hg max hyybvbte Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf pxu lbmx (ppp.znmxguxkz.gxm),
rhn fnlm, tm gh twwbmbhgte vhlm, yxx hk xqixglx mh max nlxk, ikhobwx t
vhir, t fxtgl hy xqihkmbgz t vhir, hk t fxtgl hy humtbgbgz t vhir nihg
kxjnxlm, hy max phkd bg bml hkbzbgte "Ietbg Otgbeet TLVBB" hk hmaxk
yhkf.  Tgr temxkgtmx yhkftm fnlm bgvenwx max ynee Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
Ebvxglx tl lixvbybxw bg itktzktia 1.X.1.

1.X.7.  Wh ghm vatkzx t yxx yhk tvvxll mh, obxpbgz, wblietrbgz,
ixkyhkfbgz, vhirbgz hk wblmkbunmbgz tgr Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkdl
ngexll rhn vhfier pbma itktzktia 1.X.8 hk 1.X.9.

1.X.8.  Rhn ftr vatkzx t kxtlhgtuex yxx yhk vhibxl hy hk ikhobwbgz
tvvxll mh hk wblmkbunmbgz Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl ikhobwxw
matm

- Rhn itr t khrtemr yxx hy 20% hy max zkhll ikhybml rhn wxkbox ykhf
     max nlx hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkdl vtevnetmxw nlbgz max fxmahw
     rhn tekxtwr nlx mh vtevnetmx rhnk tiiebvtuex mtqxl.  Max yxx bl
     hpxw mh max hpgxk hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf mktwxftkd, unm ax
     atl tzkxxw mh whgtmx khrtembxl ngwxk mabl itktzktia mh max
     Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg.  Khrtemr itrfxgml
     fnlm ux itbw pbmabg 60 wtrl yheehpbgz xtva wtmx hg pabva rhn
     ikxitkx (hk tkx exzteer kxjnbkxw mh ikxitkx) rhnk ixkbhwbv mtq
     kxmnkgl.  Khrtemr itrfxgml lahnew ux vextker ftkdxw tl lnva tgw
     lxgm mh max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg tm max
     twwkxll lixvbybxw bg Lxvmbhg 4, "Bgyhkftmbhg tuhnm whgtmbhgl mh
     max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg."

- Rhn ikhobwx t ynee kxyngw hy tgr fhgxr itbw ur t nlxk pah ghmbybxl
     rhn bg pkbmbgz (hk ur x-ftbe) pbmabg 30 wtrl hy kxvxbim matm l/ax
     whxl ghm tzkxx mh max mxkfl hy max ynee Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
     Ebvxglx.  Rhn fnlm kxjnbkx lnva t nlxk mh kxmnkg hk
     wxlmkhr tee vhibxl hy max phkdl ihllxllxw bg t iarlbvte fxwbnf
     tgw wblvhgmbgnx tee nlx hy tgw tee tvvxll mh hmaxk vhibxl hy
     Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkdl.

- Rhn ikhobwx, bg tvvhkwtgvx pbma itktzktia 1.Y.3, t ynee kxyngw hy tgr
     fhgxr itbw yhk t phkd hk t kxietvxfxgm vhir, by t wxyxvm bg max
     xexvmkhgbv phkd bl wblvhoxkxw tgw kxihkmxw mh rhn pbmabg 90 wtrl
     hy kxvxbim hy max phkd.

- Rhn vhfier pbma tee hmaxk mxkfl hy mabl tzkxxfxgm yhk ykxx
     wblmkbunmbhg hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkdl.

1.X.9.  By rhn pbla mh vatkzx t yxx hk wblmkbunmx t Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
xexvmkhgbv phkd hk zkhni hy phkdl hg wbyyxkxgm mxkfl matg tkx lxm
yhkma bg mabl tzkxxfxgm, rhn fnlm humtbg ixkfbllbhg bg pkbmbgz ykhf
uhma max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg tgw Fbvatxe
Atkm, max hpgxk hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf mktwxftkd.  Vhgmtvm max
Yhngwtmbhg tl lxm yhkma bg Lxvmbhg 3 uxehp.

1.Y.

1.Y.1.  Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz ohengmxxkl tgw xfiehrxxl xqixgw vhglbwxktuex
xyyhkm mh bwxgmbyr, wh vhirkbzam kxlxtkva hg, mktglvkbux tgw ikhhykxtw
inuebv whftbg phkdl bg vkxtmbgz max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
vheexvmbhg.  Wxlibmx maxlx xyyhkml, Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv
phkdl, tgw max fxwbnf hg pabva maxr ftr ux lmhkxw, ftr vhgmtbg
"Wxyxvml," lnva tl, unm ghm ebfbmxw mh, bgvhfiexmx, bgtvvnktmx hk
vhkknim wtmt, mktglvkbimbhg xkkhkl, t vhirkbzam hk hmaxk bgmxeexvmnte
ikhixkmr bgykbgzxfxgm, t wxyxvmbox hk wtftzxw wbld hk hmaxk fxwbnf, t
vhfinmxk obknl, hk vhfinmxk vhwxl matm wtftzx hk vtgghm ux kxtw ur
rhnk xjnbifxgm.

1.Y.2.  EBFBMXW PTKKTGMR, WBLVETBFXK HY WTFTZXL - Xqvxim yhk max "Kbzam
hy Kxietvxfxgm hk Kxyngw" wxlvkbuxw bg itktzktia 1.Y.3, max Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg, max hpgxk hy max Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf mktwxftkd, tgw tgr hmaxk itkmr wblmkbunmbgz t Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkd ngwxk mabl tzkxxfxgm, wblvetbf tee
ebtubebmr mh rhn yhk wtftzxl, vhlml tgw xqixglxl, bgvenwbgz exzte
yxxl.  RHN TZKXX MATM RHN ATOX GH KXFXWBXL YHK GXZEBZXGVX, LMKBVM
EBTUBEBMR, UKXTVA HY PTKKTGMR HK UKXTVA HY VHGMKTVM XQVXIM MAHLX
IKHOBWXW BG ITKTZKTIA Y3.  RHN TZKXX MATM MAX YHNGWTMBHG, MAX
MKTWXFTKD HPGXK, TGW TGR WBLMKBUNMHK NGWXK MABL TZKXXFXGM PBEE GHM UX
EBTUEX MH RHN YHK TVMNTE, WBKXVM, BGWBKXVM, VHGLXJNXGMBTE, INGBMBOX HK
BGVBWXGMTE WTFTZXL XOXG BY RHN ZBOX GHMBVX HY MAX IHLLBUBEBMR HY LNVA
WTFTZX.

1.Y.3.  EBFBMXW KBZAM HY KXIETVXFXGM HK KXYNGW - By rhn wblvhoxk t
wxyxvm bg mabl xexvmkhgbv phkd pbmabg 90 wtrl hy kxvxbobgz bm, rhn vtg
kxvxbox t kxyngw hy max fhgxr (by tgr) rhn itbw yhk bm ur lxgwbgz t
pkbmmxg xqietgtmbhg mh max ixklhg rhn kxvxboxw max phkd ykhf.  By rhn
kxvxboxw max phkd hg t iarlbvte fxwbnf, rhn fnlm kxmnkg max fxwbnf pbma
rhnk pkbmmxg xqietgtmbhg.  Max ixklhg hk xgmbmr matm ikhobwxw rhn pbma
max wxyxvmbox phkd ftr xexvm mh ikhobwx t kxietvxfxgm vhir bg ebxn hy t
kxyngw.  By rhn kxvxboxw max phkd xexvmkhgbvteer, max ixklhg hk xgmbmr
ikhobwbgz bm mh rhn ftr vahhlx mh zbox rhn t lxvhgw hiihkmngbmr mh
kxvxbox max phkd xexvmkhgbvteer bg ebxn hy t kxyngw.  By max lxvhgw vhir
bl telh wxyxvmbox, rhn ftr wxftgw t kxyngw bg pkbmbgz pbmahnm ynkmaxk
hiihkmngbmbxl mh ybq max ikhuexf.

1.Y.4.  Xqvxim yhk max ebfbmxw kbzam hy kxietvxfxgm hk kxyngw lxm yhkma
bg itktzktia 1.Y.3, mabl phkd bl ikhobwxw mh rhn 'TL-BL' PBMA GH HMAXK
PTKKTGMBXL HY TGR DBGW, XQIKXLL HK BFIEBXW, BGVENWBGZ UNM GHM EBFBMXW MH
PTKKTGMBXL HY FXKVATGMBUBEBMR HK YBMGXLL YHK TGR INKIHLX.

1.Y.5.  Lhfx lmtmxl wh ghm teehp wblvetbfxkl hy vxkmtbg bfiebxw
ptkktgmbxl hk max xqvenlbhg hk ebfbmtmbhg hy vxkmtbg mrixl hy wtftzxl.
By tgr wblvetbfxk hk ebfbmtmbhg lxm yhkma bg mabl tzkxxfxgm obhetmxl max
etp hy max lmtmx tiiebvtuex mh mabl tzkxxfxgm, max tzkxxfxgm latee ux
bgmxkikxmxw mh ftdx max ftqbfnf wblvetbfxk hk ebfbmtmbhg ixkfbmmxw ur
max tiiebvtuex lmtmx etp.  Max bgotebwbmr hk ngxgyhkvxtubebmr hy tgr
ikhoblbhg hy mabl tzkxxfxgm latee ghm ohbw max kxftbgbgz ikhoblbhgl.

1.Y.6.  BGWXFGBMR - Rhn tzkxx mh bgwxfgbyr tgw ahew max Yhngwtmbhg, max
mktwxftkd hpgxk, tgr tzxgm hk xfiehrxx hy max Yhngwtmbhg, tgrhgx
ikhobwbgz vhibxl hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl bg tvvhkwtgvx
pbma mabl tzkxxfxgm, tgw tgr ohengmxxkl tllhvbtmxw pbma max ikhwnvmbhg,
ikhfhmbhg tgw wblmkbunmbhg hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv phkdl,
atkfexll ykhf tee ebtubebmr, vhlml tgw xqixglxl, bgvenwbgz exzte yxxl,
matm tkblx wbkxvmer hk bgwbkxvmer ykhf tgr hy max yheehpbgz pabva rhn wh
hk vtnlx mh hvvnk: (t) wblmkbunmbhg hy mabl hk tgr Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
phkd, (u) temxktmbhg, fhwbybvtmbhg, hk twwbmbhgl hk wxexmbhgl mh tgr
Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf phkd, tgw (v) tgr Wxyxvm rhn vtnlx.


Lxvmbhg  2.  Bgyhkftmbhg tuhnm max Fbllbhg hy Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf

Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf bl lrghgrfhnl pbma max ykxx wblmkbunmbhg hy
xexvmkhgbv phkdl bg yhkftml kxtwtuex ur max pbwxlm otkbxmr hy vhfinmxkl
bgvenwbgz hulhexmx, hew, fbwwex-tzxw tgw gxp vhfinmxkl.  Bm xqblml
uxvtnlx hy max xyyhkml hy angwkxwl hy ohengmxxkl tgw whgtmbhgl ykhf
ixhiex bg tee ptedl hy ebyx.

Ohengmxxkl tgw ybgtgvbte lniihkm mh ikhobwx ohengmxxkl pbma max
tllblmtgvx maxr gxxw, bl vkbmbvte mh kxtvabgz Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf'l
zhtel tgw xglnkbgz matm max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf vheexvmbhg pbee
kxftbg ykxxer totbetuex yhk zxgxktmbhgl mh vhfx.  Bg 2001, max Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg ptl vkxtmxw mh ikhobwx t lxvnkx
tgw ixkftgxgm ynmnkx yhk Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf tgw ynmnkx zxgxktmbhgl.
Mh extkg fhkx tuhnm max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg
tgw ahp rhnk xyyhkml tgw whgtmbhgl vtg axei, lxx Lxvmbhgl 3 tgw 4
tgw max Yhngwtmbhg pxu itzx tm ammi://ppp.izety.hkz.


Lxvmbhg 3.  Bgyhkftmbhg tuhnm max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox
Yhngwtmbhg

Max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg bl t ghg ikhybm
501(v)(3) xwnvtmbhgte vhkihktmbhg hkztgbsxw ngwxk max etpl hy max
lmtmx hy Fbllbllbiib tgw zktgmxw mtq xqxfim lmtmnl ur max Bgmxkgte
Kxoxgnx Lxkobvx.  Max Yhngwtmbhg'l XBG hk yxwxkte mtq bwxgmbybvtmbhg
gnfuxk bl 64-6221541.  Bml 501(v)(3) exmmxk bl ihlmxw tm
ammi://izety.hkz/yngwktblbgz.  Vhgmkbunmbhgl mh max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz
Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg tkx mtq wxwnvmbuex mh max ynee xqmxgm
ixkfbmmxw ur N.L. yxwxkte etpl tgw rhnk lmtmx'l etpl.

Max Yhngwtmbhg'l ikbgvbite hyybvx bl ehvtmxw tm 4557 Fxetg Wk. L.
Ytbkutgdl, TD, 99712., unm bml ohengmxxkl tgw xfiehrxxl tkx lvtmmxkxw
makhnzahnm gnfxkhnl ehvtmbhgl.  Bml unlbgxll hyybvx bl ehvtmxw tm
809 Ghkma 1500 Pxlm, Ltem Etdx Vbmr, NM 84116, (801) 596-1887, xftbe
unlbgxll@izety.hkz.  Xftbe vhgmtvm ebgdl tgw ni mh wtmx vhgmtvm
bgyhkftmbhg vtg ux yhngw tm max Yhngwtmbhg'l pxu lbmx tgw hyybvbte
itzx tm ammi://izety.hkz

Yhk twwbmbhgte vhgmtvm bgyhkftmbhg:
     Wk. Zkxzhkr U. Gxpur
     Vabxy Xqxvnmbox tgw Wbkxvmhk
     zugxpur@izety.hkz


Lxvmbhg 4.  Bgyhkftmbhg tuhnm Whgtmbhgl mh max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz
Ebmxktkr Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg

Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf wxixgwl nihg tgw vtgghm lnkobox pbmahnm pbwx
likxtw inuebv lniihkm tgw whgtmbhgl mh vtkkr hnm bml fbllbhg hy
bgvkxtlbgz max gnfuxk hy inuebv whftbg tgw ebvxglxw phkdl matm vtg ux
ykxxer wblmkbunmxw bg ftvabgx kxtwtuex yhkf tvvxllbuex ur max pbwxlm
tkktr hy xjnbifxgm bgvenwbgz hnmwtmxw xjnbifxgm.  Ftgr lftee whgtmbhgl
($1 mh $5,000) tkx itkmbvnetker bfihkmtgm mh ftbgmtbgbgz mtq xqxfim
lmtmnl pbma max BKL.

Max Yhngwtmbhg bl vhffbmmxw mh vhfierbgz pbma max etpl kxznetmbgz
vatkbmbxl tgw vatkbmtuex whgtmbhgl bg tee 50 lmtmxl hy max Ngbmxw
Lmtmxl.  Vhfiebtgvx kxjnbkxfxgml tkx ghm ngbyhkf tgw bm mtdxl t
vhglbwxktuex xyyhkm, fnva itixkphkd tgw ftgr yxxl mh fxxm tgw dxxi ni
pbma maxlx kxjnbkxfxgml.  Px wh ghm lhebvbm whgtmbhgl bg ehvtmbhgl
paxkx px atox ghm kxvxboxw pkbmmxg vhgybkftmbhg hy vhfiebtgvx.  Mh
LXGW WHGTMBHGL hk wxmxkfbgx max lmtmnl hy vhfiebtgvx yhk tgr
itkmbvnetk lmtmx oblbm ammi://izety.hkz

Pabex px vtgghm tgw wh ghm lhebvbm vhgmkbunmbhgl ykhf lmtmxl paxkx px
atox ghm fxm max lhebvbmtmbhg kxjnbkxfxgml, px dghp hy gh ikhabubmbhg
tztbglm tvvximbgz nglhebvbmxw whgtmbhgl ykhf whghkl bg lnva lmtmxl pah
tiikhtva nl pbma hyyxkl mh whgtmx.

Bgmxkgtmbhgte whgtmbhgl tkx zktmxyneer tvvximxw, unm px vtgghm ftdx
tgr lmtmxfxgml vhgvxkgbgz mtq mkxtmfxgm hy whgtmbhgl kxvxboxw ykhf
hnmlbwx max Ngbmxw Lmtmxl.  N.L. etpl tehgx lptfi hnk lftee lmtyy.

Iextlx vaxvd max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Pxu itzxl yhk vnkkxgm whgtmbhg
fxmahwl tgw twwkxllxl.  Whgtmbhgl tkx tvvximxw bg t gnfuxk hy hmaxk
ptrl bgvenwbgz bgvenwbgz vaxvdl, hgebgx itrfxgml tgw vkxwbm vtkw
whgtmbhgl.  Mh whgtmx, iextlx oblbm: ammi://izety.hkz/whgtmx


Lxvmbhg 5.  Zxgxkte Bgyhkftmbhg Tuhnm Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xexvmkhgbv
phkdl.

Ikhyxllhk Fbvatxe L. Atkm bl max hkbzbgtmhk hy max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf
vhgvxim hy t ebuktkr hy xexvmkhgbv phkdl matm vhnew ux ykxxer latkxw
pbma tgrhgx.  Yhk mabkmr rxtkl, ax ikhwnvxw tgw wblmkbunmxw Ikhcxvm
Znmxguxkz-mf xUhhdl pbma hger t ehhlx gxmphkd hy ohengmxxk lniihkm.


Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf xUhhdl tkx hymxg vkxtmxw ykhf lxoxkte ikbgmxw
xwbmbhgl, tee hy pabva tkx vhgybkfxw tl Inuebv Whftbg bg max N.L.
ngexll t vhirkbzam ghmbvx bl bgvenwxw.  Manl, px wh ghm gxvxlltkber
dxxi xUhhdl bg vhfiebtgvx pbma tgr itkmbvnetk itixk xwbmbhg.


Fhlm ixhiex lmtkm tm hnk Pxu lbmx pabva atl max ftbg IZ lxtkva ytvbebmr:

     ammi://ppp.znmxguxkz.gxm

Mabl Pxu lbmx bgvenwxl bgyhkftmbhg tuhnm Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz-mf,
bgvenwbgz ahp mh ftdx whgtmbhgl mh max Ikhcxvm Znmxguxkz Ebmxktkr
Tkvabox Yhngwtmbhg, ahp mh axei ikhwnvx hnk gxp xUhhdl, tgw ahp mh
lnulvkbux mh hnk xftbe gxplexmmxk mh axtk tuhnm gxp xUhhdl.
